DISCOURSE 1
Dhritarashtra Said:
1. Tell me, O Sanjaya, what my sons and Pandu's assembled, on battle intent,
did on the field of Kuru, the field of duty.
The human body is the battlefield where the eternal duel between right and
wrong goes on. Therefore it is capable of being turned into a gateway to
Freedom. It is born in sin and becomes the seed-bed of sin. Hence it is also
called the field of Kuru. The Kuravas represent the forces of Evil, the


Pandavas the forces of Good. Who is there that has not experienced the daily
conflict within himself between the forces of Evil and the forces of Good?
Sanjaya Said:
2. On seeing the Pandava's army drawn up in battle array, King Duryodhana
approached Drona, the preceptor, and addressed him thus:
3. Behold, O preceptor, this mighty army of the sons of Pandu, set in array by
the son of Drupada, thy wise disciple.
4. Here are brave bowmen, peers of Bhima and Arjuna in fighting: Yuyudhana
and Virata, and the ‘Maharatha' Drupada.
5. Dhrishtaketu, Chekitana, valorous Kashiraja, Purujit the Kuntibhoja, and
Shaibya, chief among men;
6. Valiant Yudhamanyu, valorous Uttamaujas, Subhadra's son, and the sons of
Draupadi--each one of them a 'Maharatha'.
7. Acquaint thyself now, O best of Brahmanas, with the distinguished among
us. I mention for thy information, the names of the captains of my army.
8. Thy noble self, Bhishma, Karna, and Kripa, victorious in battle,
Ashvatthaman, Vikarna, also Somadatta's son;
9. There is many another hero, known for his skill in wielding diverse weapons,
pledged to lay down his life for my sake, and all adepts in war.
10. This our force, commanded by Bhishma, is all too inadequate; while theirs,
commanded by Bhima, is quite adequate.
11. Therefore, let each of you, holding your appointed places, at every entrance,
guard only Bhishma.
12. At this, the heroic grandsire, the grand old man of the Kurus, gave a loud
lion's roar and blew his conch to hearten Duryodhana.
13. Thereupon, conches, drums, cymbals and trumpets were sounded all at
once. Terrific was the noise.
14. Then Madhava and Pandava, standing in their great chariot yoked with
white steeds, blew their divine conches.
15. Hrishikesha blew the Panchajanya and Dhananjaya the Devadatta; while the
wolf-bellied Bhima of dread deeds sounded his great conch Paundra.


16. King Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, blew the Anantavijaya, and Nakula nd
Sahadeva their conches, Sughosha and Manipushpaka.
17. And Kashiraja, the great bowman, Shikhandi
Dhrishtadyumna, Virata and Satyaki, the unconquerable;

the

'Maharatha',

18. Drupada, Draupadi's sons, the strong-armed son of Subhadra, all these, O
King, blew each his own conch.
19. That terrifying tumult, causing earth and heaven to resound, rent the hearts
of Dhritarashtra's sons.
20-21. Then, O King, the ape-bannered Pandava, seeing Dhritarashtra's sons
arrayed and flight of arrows about to begin, took up his bow, and spoke thus to
Hrishikesha: "Set my chariot between the two armies, O Achyuta!"
22. That I may behold them drawn up, on battle intent, and know whom I have
to engage in this fearful combat;
23. And that I may survey the fighters assembled here anxious to fulfil in battle
perverse Duryodhana's desire.
Sanjaya Said:
24-25. Thus addressed by Gudakesha, O King, Hrishikesha set the unique
chariot between the two armies in front of Bhishma, Drona and all the kings
and said: Behold, O Partha, the Kurus assembled yonder.
26-28. Then did Partha see, standing there, sires, grandsires, preceptors, uncles,
brothers, sons, grandsons, comrades, fathers-in-law and friends in both armies.
Beholding all these kinsmen ranged before him, Kaunteya was overcome with
great compassion and spake thus in anguish:
Arjuna Said:
28-29. As I look upon these kinsmen, O Krishna, assembled here eager to fight,
my limbs fail, my mouth is parched, a tremor shakes my frame and my hair
stands on end.
30. Gandiva slips from my hand, my skin is on fire, I cannot keep my feet, and
my mind reels.
31. I have unhappy forebodings, O Keshava; and I see no good in slaying
kinsmen in battle.
32. I seek not victory, nor sovereign power, nor earthly joys. What good are
sovereign power, worldly pleasures and even life to us, O Govinda?



33. Those for whom we would desire sovereign power, earthly joys and
delights are here arrayed in battle, having renounced life and wealth-34. Preceptors, sires, grandsires, sons and even
fathers-in-law, brothers-in-law, and other kinsmen.

grandsons,

uncles,

35. These I would not kill, O Madhusudana, even though they slay me, not even
for kingship of the three worlds, much less for an earthly kingdom.
36. What pleasure can there be in slaying these sons of Dhritarashtra, O
Janardana? Sin only can be our lot, if we slay these, usurpers though they be.
37. It does not therefore behove us to kill our kinsmen, these sons of
Dhritarashtra. How may we be happy, O Madhava, in killing our own kins?
38. Even though these, their wits warped by greed, see not the guilt that lies in
destroying the family, nor the sin of treachery to comrades;
39. How can we, O Janardana, help recoiling from this sin, seeing clearly as we
do the guilt that lies in such destruction?
40. With the destruction of the family perish the eternal family virtues, and with
the perishing of these virtues unrighteousness seizes the whole family.
41. When unrighteousness prevails, O Krishna, the women of the family
become corrupt, and their corruption, O Varshneya, causes a confusion of
varnas.
42. This confusion verily drags the family-slayer, as well as the family, to hell,
and for want of obsequial offerings and rites their departed sires fall from
blessedness.
43. By the sins of these family-slayers resulting in confusion of varnas, the
eternal tribal and family virtues are brought to naught.
44. For we have had it handed down to us, O Janardana, that the men whose
family virtues have been ruined are doomed to dwell in hell.
45. Alas! What a heinous sin we are about to commit, in that, from greed of the
joy of sovereign power, we are prepared to slay our kith and kin!
46. Happier far would it be for me if Dhritarashtra's sons, weapons in hand,
should strike me down on the battlefield, unresisting and unarmed.
Sanjaya Said:


47. Thus spake Arjuna on the field of battle, and dropping his bow and arrows
sank down on his seat in the chariot, overwhelmed with anguish.
Thus ends the first discourse, entitled 'Arjuna Vishada Yoga' in the converse of
Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 2
Sanjaya Said:
1. To Arjuna, thus overcome with compassion, sorrowing, and his eyes
obscured by flowing tears, Madhusudana spake these words:
The Lord Said:
2. How is it that at this perilous moment this delusion, unworthy of the noble,
leading neither to heaven nor to glory, has overtaken thee?
3. Yield not to unmanliness, O Partha; it does not become thee. Shake off this
miserable faint-heartedness and arise, O Parantapa!
Arjuna Said:
4. How shall I, with arrows, engage Bhishma and Drona in battle, O
Madhusudana, they who are worthy of reverence, O Arisudana?
5. It were better far to live on alms of this world than to slay these venerable
elders. Having slain them I should but have blood-stained enjoyments.
6. Nor do we know which is better for us, that we conquer them or that they
conquer us, for here stand before us Dhritarashtra's sons having killed whom
we should have no desire to live.


7. My being is paralysed by faint-heartedness; my mind discerns not duty;
hence I ask thee; tell me, I pray thee, in no uncertain language, wherein lies my
good. I am thy disciple; guide me; I see refuge in thee.
8. For I see nothing that can dispel the anguish that shrivels up my senses even
if I should win on earth uncontested sovereignty over a thriving kingdom or
lordship over the gods.
Sanjaya Said:
9. Thus spoke Gudakesha Parantapa to Hrishikesha Govinda, and with the
words 'I will not fight' became speechless.
10. To him thus stricken with anguish, O Bharata! between the two armies,
Hrishikesha, as though mocking, addressed these words:
The Lord Said:
11. Thou mournest for them whom thou shouldst not mourn and utterest vain
words of wisdom. The wise mourn neither for the living nor for the dead.
12. For never was I not, nor thou, nor these kings; nor will any of us cease to be
hereafter.
13. As the embodied one has, in the present body, infancy, youth and age, even
so does he receive another body. The wise man is not deceived therein.
14. O Kaunteya! Contacts of the senses with their objects bring cold and heat,
pleasure and pain; they come and go and are transient. Endure them, O
Bharata.
15. O noblest of men, the wise man who is not disturbed by these, who is
unmoved by pleasure and pain, he is fitted for immortality.
16. What is non-Being is never known to have been, and what is Being is never
known not to have been. Of both these the secret has been seen by the seers of
the Truth.
17. Know that to be imperishable whereby all this is pervaded. No one can
destroy that immutable being.
18. These bodies of the embodied one who is eternal, imperishable and
immeasurable are finite. Fight, therefore, O Bharata.
19. He who thinks of This (Atman) as slayer and he who believes This to be
slain, are both ignorant. This neither slays nor is ever slain.

20. This is never born nor ever dies, nor having been will ever not be any more;
unborn, eternal, everlasting, ancient, This is not slain when the body is slain.
21. He who knows This, O Partha, to be imperishable, eternal, unborn, and
immutable—whom and how can that man slay or cause to be slain?
22. As a man casts off worn-out garments and takes others that are new, even so
the embodied one casts off worn-out bodies and passes on to others new.
23. This no weapons wound, This no fire burns, This no waters wet, This no
wind doth dry.
24. Beyond all cutting, burning, wetting and drying is This-eternal,
all-pervading, stable, immovable, everlasting.
25. Perceivable neither by the senses nor by the mind, This is called
unchangeable; therefore knowing This as such thou shouldst not grieve.
26. And if thou deemest This to be always coming to birth and always dying,
even then, O Mahabahu, thou shouldst not grieve.
27. For certain is the death of the born, and certain is the birth of the dead;
therefore what is unavoidable thou shouldst not regret.
28. The state of all beings before birth is unmanifest; their middle state manifest;
their state after death is again unmanifest. What occasion is there for lament, O
Bharata?
29. One looks upon This as a marvel; another speaks of This as such; another
hears thereof as a marvel; yet having heard This none truly knows This.
30. This embodied one in the body of every being is ever beyond all harm, O
Bharata; thou shouldst not, therefore, grieve for any one.
Thus far Lord Krishna, by force of argument based on pure reason, has
demonstrated that Atman is abiding while the physical body is fleeting, and
has explained that if, under certain circumstances, the destruction of a
physical body is deemed justifiable, it is delusion to imagine that the
Kauravas should not be slain because they are kinsmen. Now he reminds
Arjuna of the duty of a Kshatriya.
31. Again, seeing thine own duty thou shouldst not shrink from it; for there is
no higher good for a Kshatriya than a righteous war.
32. Such a fight, coming unsought, as a gateway to heaven thrown open, falls
only to the lot of happy Kshatriyas, O Partha.


33. But if thou wilt not fight this righteous fight, then failing in thy duty and
losing thine honour thou wilt incur sin.
34. The world will for ever recount the story of thy disgrace; and for a man of
honour disgrace is worse than death.
35. The Maharathas will think that fear made thee retire from battle; and thou
wilt fall in the esteem of those very ones who have held thee high.
36. Thine enemies will deride thy prowess and speak many unspeakable words
about thee. What can be more painful than that?
37. Slain, thou shalt gain heaven; victorious, thou shall inherit the earth:
therefore arise, O Kaunteya, determined to fight.
Having declared the highest truth, viz. the immortality of the eternal Atman
and the fleeting nature of the physical body (11-30), Krishna reminds Arjuna
that a Kshatriya may not flinch from a fight which comes unsought (31-32).
He then (33-37) shows how the highest truth and the performance of duty
incidentally coincide with expediency. Next he proceeds to foreshadow the
central teaching of the Gita in the following shloka.
38. Hold alike pleasure and pain, gain and loss, victory and defeat, and gird up
thy loins for the fight; so doing thou shalt not incur sin.
39. Thus have I set before thee the attitude of Knowledge; hear now the attitude
of Action; resorting to this attitude thou shalt cast off the bondage of action.
40. Here no effort undertaken is lost, no disaster befalls. Even a little of this
righteous course delivers one from great fear.
41. The attitude, in this matter, springing, as it does, from fixed resolve is but
one, O Kurunandana; but for those who have no fixed resolve the attitudes are
many-branched and unending.
When the attitude ceases to be one and undivided and becomes many and
divided, it ceases to be one settled will, and is broken up into various wills of
desires between which man is tossed about.
42-44. The ignorant, revelling in the letter of the Vedas, declare that there is
naught else; carnally-minded, holding heaven to be their goal, they utter
swelling words which promise birth as the fruit of action and which dwell on
the many and varied rites to be performed for the sake of pleasure and power;
intent, as they are, on pleasure and power their swelling words rob them of
their wits, and they have no settled attitude which can be centered on the
supreme goal.


The Vedic ritual, as opposed to the doctrine of Yoga laid down in the Gita, is
alluded to here. The Vedic ritual lays countless ceremonies and rites with a
view to attaining merit and heaven. These, divorced as they are from the
essence of the Vedas and short-lived in their result, are worthless.
45. The Vedas have as their domain the three gunas; eschew them, O Arjuna.
Free thyself from the pairs of opposites, abide in eternal truth, scorn to gain or
guard anything, remain the master of thy soul.
46. To the extent that a well is of use when there is a flood of water on all sides,
to the same extent are all the Vedas of use to an enlightened Brahmana.
47. Action alone is thy province, never the fruits thereof; let not thy motive be
the fruit of action, nor shouldst thou desire to avoid action.
48. Act thou, O Dhananjaya, without attachment, steadfast in Yoga,
even-minded in success and failure. Even-mindedness is Yoga.
49. For action, O Dhananjaya, is far inferior to unattached action; seek refuge in
the attitude of detached action. Pitiable are those who make fruit their motive.
50. Here in this world a man gifted with that attitude of detachment escapes the
fruit of both good and evil deeds. Gird thyself up for Yoga, therefore. Yoga is
skill in action.
51. For sages, gifted with the attitude of detachment, who renounce the fruit of
action, are released from the bondage of birth and attain to the state which is
free from all ills.
52. When thy understanding will have passed through the slough of delusion,
then wilt thou be indifferent alike to what thou hast heard and wilt hear.
53. When thy understanding, distracted by much hearing, will rest steadfast
and unmoved in concentration, then wilt thou attain Yoga.
Arjuna Said:
54. What, O Keshava, is the mark of the man whose understanding is secure,
whose mind is fixed in concentration? How does he talk? How sit? How move.
The Lord Said:
55. When a man puts away, O partha, all the cravings that arise in the mind and
finds comfort for himself only from Atman, then he is called the man of secure
understanding.


To find comfort for oneself from Atman means to look to the spirit within for
spiritual comfort, not to outside objects which in their very nature must give
pleasure as well as pain. Spiritual comfort or bliss must be distinguished
from pleasure or happiness. The pleasure I may derive from the possession of
wealth, for instance, is delusive; real spiritual comfort or bliss can be attained
only if I rise superior to every temptation even though troubled by the pangs
of poverty and hunger.
56. Whose mind is untroubled in sorrows and longeth not for joys, who is free
from passion, fear and wrath—he is called the ascetic of secure understanding.
57. Who owns attachment nowhere, who feels neither joy nor resentment
whether good or bad comes his way—that man's understanding is secure.
58. And when, like the tortoise drawing in its limbs from every side, this man
draws in his senses from their objects, his understanding is secure.
59. When a man starves his senses, the objects of those senses disappear from
him, but not the yearning for them; the yearning too departs when he beholds
the Supreme.
The shloka does not rule out fasting and other forms of self-restraint, but
indicates their limitations, these restraints are needed for subduing the desire
for sense-objects, which however is rooted out only when one has a vision of
the Supreme. The higher yearning conquers all the lower yearnings.
60. For, in spite of the wise man's endeavour, O Kaunteya, the unruly senses
distract his mind perforce.
61. Holding all these in check, the yogi should sit intent on Me; for he whose
senses are under control is secure of understanding.
This means that without devotion and the consequent grace of God, man's
endeavour is vain.
62. In a man brooding on objects of the senses, attachment to them springs up;
attachment begets craving and craving begets wrath.
Craving cannot but lead to resentment, for it is unending and unsatisfied.
63. Wrath breeds stupefaction, stupefaction leads to loss of memory, loss of
memory ruins the reason, and the ruin of reason spells utter destruction.
64. But the disciplined soul, moving among sense-objects with the senses
weaned from likes and dislikes and brought under the control of Atman, attains
peace of mind.
17


65. Peace of mind means the end to all ills, for the understanding of him whose
mind is at peace stands secure.
66. The undisciplined man has neither understanding nor devotion; for him
who has no devotion there is no peace, and for him who has no peace whence
happiness?
67. For when his mind runs after any of the roaming senses, it sweeps away his
understanding, as the wind a vessel upon the waters.
68. Therefore, O Mahabahu, he, whose senses are reined in on all sides from
their objects, is the man of secure understanding.
69. When it is night for all other beings, the disciplined soul is awake; when all
other beings are awake, it is night for the seeing ascetic.
This verse indicates the divergent paths of the discipline ascetic and sensual
man. Whereas the ascetic is dead to the things of the world and lives in God,
the sensual man is alive only to the things of the world and dead to the things
of the spirit.
70. He in whom all longings subside, even as the waters subside in the ocean
which, though ever being filled by them, never overflows—that man finds
peace; not he who cherishes longing.
71. The man who sheds all longing and moves without concern, free from the
sense of ‘I' and ‘Mine'—he attains peace.
72. This is the state, O partha, of the man who rests in Brahman; having attained
to it, he is not deluded. He who abides in this state even at the hour of death
passes into oneness with Brahman.
Thus ends the second discourse, entitled ‘Sankhya Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 3
1. If, O Janardana, thou holdest that the attitude of detachment is superior to
action, then why, O Keshava, dost thou urge me to dreadful action?
18


2. Thou dost seem to confuse my understanding with perplexing speech; tell
me, therefore, in no uncertain voice, that alone whereby I may attain salvation.
Arjuna is sore perplexed, for whilst on the one hand he is rebuked for his
faint-heartedness, on the other he seems to be advised to refrain from action
(II.49-50). But this, in reality, is not the case as the following shlokas will
show.
The Lord Said:
3. I have spoken, before, O sinless one, of two attitudes in this world—the
Sankhayas', that of Jnana yoga and the Yogins', that of karma yoga.
4. Never does man enjoy freedom from action by not undertaking action, nor
does he attain that freedom by mere renunciation of action.
‘Freedom from action' is freedom from the bondage of action. This freedom is
not to be gained by cessation of all activity, apart from the fact that this
cessation is in the very nature of things impossible (see following shloka).
How then may it be gained? The following shlokas will explain.
5. For none ever remains inactive even for a moment; for all are compelled to
action by the gunas inherent in prakriti.
6. He who curbs the organs of action but allows the mind to dwell on the
sense-objects,—such a one, wholly deluded, is called a hypocrite.
The man who curbs his tongue but mentally swears at another is a hypocrite.
But that does not mean that free rein should be given to the organs of action
so long as the mind cannot be brought under control. Self-imposed physical
restraint is a condition precedent to mental restraint. Physical restraint should
be entirely self-imposed and not super-imposed from outside, e.g. by fear.
The hypocrite who is held up to contempt here is not the humble aspirant
after self-restraint. The shloka has reference to the man who curbs the body
because he cannot help it while indulging the mind, and who would indulge
the body too if he possibly could. The next shloka puts the thing conversely.
7. But he, O Arjuna, who keeping all the senses under control of the mind,
engages the organs in Karma yoga, without attachment—that man excels.
The mind and body should be made to accord well. Even with the mind kept
in control, the body will be active in one way or another. But he whose mind
is truly restrained will, for instance, close his ears to foul talk and open them
only to listen to the praise of God or of good men. He will have no relish for
sensual pleasures and will keep himself occupied with such activity as
ennobles the soul. That is the path of action. Karma yoga is the yoga (means)
19


which will deliver the self from the bondage of the body, and in it there is no
room for self-indulgence.
8. Do thou thy allotted task; for action is superior to inaction; with inaction even
life's normal course is not possible.
9. This world of men suffers bondage from all action save that which is done for
the sake of sacrifice; to this end, O Kaunteya, perform action without
attachment.
‘Action for the sake of sacrifice' means acts of selfless service dedicated to
God.
10. Together with sacrifice did the Lord of beings create, of old, mankind,
declaring:
"By this shall ye increase; may this be to you the giver of all your desires.
11. "With this may you cherish the gods and may the gods cherish you; thus
cherishing one another may you attain the highest good.
12. "Cherished with sacrifice, the gods will bestow on you the desired boons."
He who enjoys their gifts without rendering aught unto them is verily a thief.
"Gods" in shlokas 11 and 12 must be taken to mean the whole creation of
God. The service of all created beings is the service of the gods and the same
is sacrifice.
13. The righteous men who eat the residue of the sacrifice are freed from all sin,
but the wicked who cook for themselves eat sin.
14. From food springs all life, from rain is born food; from sacrifice comes rain
and sacrifice is the result of action.
15. Know that action springs from Brahman and Brahman from the
Imperishable; hence the all-pervading Brahman is ever firm-founded on
sacrifice.
16. He who does not follow the wheel thus set in motion here below, he, living
in sin, sating his senses, lives, O Partha, in vain.
17. But the man who revels in Atman, who is content in Atman and who is
satisfied only with Atman, for him no action exists.
18. He has no interest whatever in anything done, nor in anything not done, nor
has he need to rely on anything for personal ends.
20


19. Therefore, do thou ever perform without attachment the work that thou
must do; for performing action without attachment man attains the Supreme.
20. For through action alone Janaka and others achieved perfection; even with a
view to the guidance of mankind thou must act.
21. Whatever the best man does, is also done by other men, what example he
sets, the world follows.
22. For me, O Partha, there is naught to do in the three worlds, nothing worth
gaining that I have not gained; yet I am ever in action.
An objection is sometimes raised that God being impersonal is not likely to
perform any physical activity, at best He may be supposed to act mentally.
This is not correct. For the unceasing movement of the sun, the moon, the
earth etc. signifies God in action. This is not mental but physical activity.
Though God is without form and impersonal, He acts as though He had form
and body. Hence though He is ever in action, He is free from action,
unaffected by action. What must be borne in mind is that, just as all Nature's
movements and processes are mechanical and yet guided by Divine
Intelligence or Will, even so man must reduce his daily conduct to
mechanical regularity and precision, but he must do so intelligently. Man's
merit lies in observing divine guidance at the back of these processes and in
an intelligent imitation of it rather than in emphasizing the mechanical
nature thereof and reducing himself to an automation. One has but to
withdraw the self, withdraw attachment to fruit from all action, and then not
only mechanical precision but security from all wear and tear will be
ensured. Acting thus man remains fresh until the end of his days. His body
will perish in due course, but his soul will remain evergreen without a crease
or a wrinkle.
23. Indeed, for were I not, unslumbering, ever to remain in action, O Partha,
men would follow my example in every way.
24. If I were not to perform my task, these worlds would be ruined; I should be
the same cause of chaos and of the end of all mankind.
25. Just as, with attachment, the unenlightened perform all actions, O Bharata,
even so, but unattached, should the enlightened man act, with a desire for the
welfare of humanity.
26. The enlightened may not confuse the mind of the unenlightened, who are
attached to action; rather must he perform all actions unattached, and thus
encourage them to do likewise.
27. All action is entirely done by the gunas of prakriti. Man, deluded by the
sense of ‘I', thinks, ‘I am the doer'.
21


28. But he, O Mahabahu, who understands the truth of the various gunas and
their various activities, knows that it is the gunas that operate on the gunas; he
does not claim to be the doer.
As breathing, winking and similar processes are automatic and man claims
no agency for them, he being conscious of the processes only when disease or
similar cause arrests them, in a similar manner all his acclivities should be
automatic, without his arrogating to himself the agency or responsibility
thereof. A man of charity does not even know that he is doing charitable acts,
it is his nature to do so, he cannot help it. This detachment can only come
from tireless endeavour and God's grace.
29. Deluded by the gunas of prakriti men become attached to the activities of
the gunas; he who knows the truth of things should not unhinge the
slow-witted who have not the knowledge.
30. Cast all thy acts on Me, with thy mind fixed on the indwelling Atman, and
without any thought of fruit, or sense of ‘mine' shake off thy fever and fight!
He who knows the Atman inhabiting the body and realizes Him to be a part
of the supreme Atman will dedicate everything to Him, even as a faithful
servant acts as a mere shadow of his master and dedicates to him all that he
does. For the master is the real doer, the servant but the instrument.
31. Those who always act according to the rule I have here laid down, in faith
and without cavilling—they too are released from the bondage of their actions.
32. But those who cavil at the rule and refuse to conform to it are fools, dead to
all knowledge; know that they are lost.
33. Even a man of knowledge acts according to his nature; all creatures follow
their nature; what then will constraint avail?
This does not run counter to the teaching in II. 61 and II. 68. Self-restraint is
the means of salvation (VI. 35; XIII. 7). Man's energies should be bent
towards achieving complete self-restraint until the end of his days. But if he
does not succeed, neither will constraint help him. The shloka does not rule
out restraint but explains that nature prevails. He who justifies himself
saying, ‘I cannot do this, it is not in my nature,' misreads the shloka. True we
do not know our nature, but habit is not nature. Progress, not decline, ascent,
not descent, is the nature of the soul, and therefore every threatened decline
or descent ought to be resisted. The next verse makes this abundantly clear.
34. Each sense has its settled likes and dislikes towards its objects; man should
not come under the sway of these, for they are his besetters.

22


Hearing, for instance, is the object of the ears which may be inclined to hear
something and disinclined to hear something else. Man may not allow
himself to be swayed by these likes and dislikes, but must decide for himself
what is conducive to his growth, his ultimate end being to reach the state
beyond happiness and misery.
35. Better one's own duty, bereft of merit, than another's well-performed; better
is death in the discharge of one's duty; another's duty is fraught with danger.
One man's duty may be to serve the community by working as a sweeper,
another's may be to work as an accountant. An accountant's work may be
more inviting, but that need not draw the sweeper away from his work.
Should he allow himself to be drawn away he would himself be lost and put
the community into danger. Before God the work of man will be judged by
the spirit in which it is done, not by the nature of the work which makes no
difference whatsoever. Whoever acts in a spirit of dedication fits himself for
salvation.
Arjuna Said:
36. Then what impels man to sin, O Varshneya, even against his will, as though
by force compelled?
The Lord Said:
37. It is Lust, it is Wrath, born of the guna—Rajas. It is the arch-devourer, the
arch-sinner. Know this to be man's enemy here.
38. As fire is obscured by smoke, a mirror by dirt, and the embryo by the
amnion, so is knowledge obscured by this.
39. Knowledge is obscured, O Kaunteya, by this eternal enemy of the wise man,
in the form of Lust, the insatiable fire.
40. The senses, the mind and the reason are said to be its great seat; by means of
these it obscures knowledge and stupefies man.
When Lust seizes the senses, the mind is corrupted, discrimination is
obscured and reason ruined. See II. 62-64.
41. Therefore, O Bharatarshabha, bridle thou first the senses and then rid thyself
of this sinner, the destroyer of knowledge and discrimination.
42. Subtle, they say, are the senses; subtler than the senses is the mind; subtler
than the mind is the reason; but subtler even than the reason is He.

23


43. Thus realizing Him to be subtler than the reason, and controlling the self by
the Self (Atman), destroy, O Mahabahu, this enemy—Lust, so hard to
overcome.
When man realizes Him, his mind will be under his control, not swayed by
the senses. And when the mind is conquered, what power has Lust? It is
indeed a subtle enemy, but when once the senses, the mind and the reason
are under the control of the subtlemost Self, Lust is extinguished.
Thus ends the third discourse entitled ‘Karma Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 4
1. I expounded this imperishable yoga to Vivasvat; Vivasvat communicated it to
Manu, and Manu to Ikshvaku.
2. Thus handed down in succession, the royal sages learnt it; with long lapse of
time it dwindled away in this world, O Parantapa.
3. The same ancient yoga have I expounded to thee today; for thou art My
devotee and My friend, and this is the supreme mystery.
Arjuna Said:
4. Later was Thy birth, my Lord, earlier that of Vivasvat. How then am I to
understand that Thou didst expound it in the beginning?
The Lord Said:
5. Many births have we passed through, O Arjuna, both thou and I; I know
them all, thou knowest them not, O Parantapa.
Though unborn and inexhaustible in My essence, though Lord of all beings, yet
assuming control over My Nature, I come into being by My mysterious power.
7. For whenever Right declines and Wrong prevails, then O Bharata, I come to
birth.

24


8. To save the righteous, to destroy the wicked, and to re-establish Right I am
born from age to age.
Here is comfort for the faithful and affirmation of the truth that Right ever
prevails. An eternal conflict between Right and Wrong goes on. Sometimes
the latter seems to get the upper hand, but it is Right which ultimately
prevails. The good are never destroyed, for Right—which is Truth—cannot
perish; the wicked are destroyed, because Wrong has no independent
existence. Knowing this let man cease to arrogate to himself authorship and
eschew untruth, violence and evil. Inscrutable Providence—the unique
power of the Lord—is ever at work. This in fact is avatara, incarnation.
Strictly speaking there can be no birth for God.
9. He who knows the secret of this My divine birth and action is not born again,
after leaving the body; he comes to Me, O Arjuna.
For when a man is secure in the faith that Right always prevails, he never
swerves therefrom, pursuing to the bitterest end and against serious odds,
and as no part of the effort proceeds from his ego, but all is dedicated to Him,
being ever one with Him, he is released from birth to death.
10. Freed from passion, fear and wrath, filled full with Me, relying on Me, and
refined by the fiery ordeal of knowledge, many have become one with Me.
11. In whatever way men resort to Me, even so do I render to them. In every
way, O Partha, the path men follow is Mine.
That is, the whole world is under His ordinance. No one may break God's
law with impunity. As we sow, so shall we reap. This law operates inexorably
without fear or favor.
12. Those who desire their actions to bear fruit worship the gods here; for in this
world of men the fruit of action is quickly obtainable.
Gods, as indicated before, must not be taken to mean the heavenly beings of
tradition, but whatever reflects the divine. In that sense man is also a god.
Steam, electricity and the other great forces of Nature are all gods.
Propitiation of these forces quickly bears fruit, as we well know, but it is
short-lived. It fails to bring comfort to the soul and it certainly does not take
one even a short step towards salvation.
13. The order of the four varnas was created by Me according to the different
gunas and karma of each; yet know that though, therefore, author thereof,
being changeless I am not the author.
14. Actions do not affect Me, nor am I concerned with the fruits thereof. He who
recognizes Me as such is not bound by actions.
25


For man has thus before him the supreme example of one who though in
action is not the doer thereof. And when we are but instruments in His hands,
where then is the room for arrogating responsibility for action?
15. Knowing this did men of old, desirous of freedom, perform action; do thou,
then, just as they did—the men of old in days gone by.
16. ‘What is action? What is inaction?'—here even the wise are perplexed. I will
then expound to thee that action knowing which thou shalt be saved from evil.
17. For it is meet to know the meaning of action, of forbidden action, as also
inaction. Impenetrable is the secret of action.
18. Who sees action in action and action in inaction, he is enlightened among
men, he is a yogi, he has done all he need do.
The ‘action' of him who, though ever active, does not claim to be the doer, is
inaction; and the ‘inaction' of him who, though outwardly avoiding action, is
always building castles in his own mind, is action. The enlightened man who
has grasped the secret of action knows that no action proceeds from him, all
proceeds from God and hence he selflessly remains absorbed in action. He is
the true yogi. The man who acts self-fully misses the secret of action and
cannot distinguish between Right and Wrong. The soul's natural progress is
towards selflessness and purity and one might, therefore, say that the man
who strays from the path of purity strays from selflessness. All actions of the
selfless man are naturally pure.
19. He whose every undertaking is free from desire and selfish purpose, and he
who has burnt all his actions in the fire of knowledge—such an one the wise call
a pandita.
20. He who has renounced attachment to the fruit of action, who is ever content,
and free from all dependence,—he, though immersed in action, yet acts not.
That is, his action does not bind him.
21. Expecting naught, holding his mind and body in check, putting away every
possession, and going through action only in the body he incurs no stain.
The purest act, if tainted by ‘self', binds. But when it is done in a spirit of
dedication, it ceases to bind. When ‘self' has completely subsided, it is only
the body that works. For instance, in the case of a man who is asleep his body
alone is working. A prisoner doing his prison tasks has surrendered his body
to the prison authorities and only his body, therefore, works. Similarly, he
who has voluntarily made himself God's prisoner, does nothing himself. His

26


body mechanically acts, the doer is God, hot he. He has reduced himself to
nothingness.
22. Content with whatever chance may bring, rid of the pairs of opposites, free
from ill-will, even-minded in success and failure, he is not bound though he
acts.
23. Of the free soul who has shred all attachment, whose mind is firmly
grounded in knowledge, who acts only for sacrifice, all karma is extinguished.
24. The offering of sacrifice is Brahman; the oblation is Brahman; it is offered by
Brahman in the fire that is Brahman; thus he whose mind is fixed on acts
dedicated to Brahman must needs pass on to Brahman.
25. Some yogins perform sacrifice in the form of worship of the gods, others
offer sacrifice of sacrifice itself in the fire that is Brahman.
26. Some offer as sacrifice the sense of hearing and the other senses in the fires
of restraint; others sacrifice sound and the other objects of sense in the fires of
the senses.
The restraint of the senses—hearing and others—is one thing; and directing
them only to legitimate objects, e.g. listening to hymns in the praise of god, is
another, although ultimately both amount to the same thing.
27. Others again sacrifice all the activities of the senses and of the vital energy in
the yogic fire of self-control kindled by knowledge.
That is to say, they lose themselves in the contemplation of the Supreme.
28. Some sacrifice with material gifts; with austerities; with yoga; some with the
acquiring and some with the imparting of knowledge. All these are sacrifices of
stern vows and serious endeavour.
29. Others absorbed in the practices of the control of the vital energy sacrifice
the outward in the inward and the inward in the outward, or check the flow of
both the inward and the outward vital airs.
The reference here is to the three kinds of practices of the control of vital
energy—puraka, rechaka, and kumbhaka.
30. Yet others, abstemious in food, sacrifice one form of vital energy in another.
All these know what sacrifice is and purge themselves of all impurities by
sacrifice.

27


31. Those who partake of the residue of sacrifice—called amrita
(ambrosia)—attain to everlasting Brahman. Even this world is not for a
non-sacrificer; how then the next, O Kurusattama?
32. Even so various sacrifices have been described in the Vedas; know them all
to proceed from action; knowing this thou shalt be released.
Action here means mental, physical and spiritual action. No sacrifice is
possible without this triple action and no salvation without sacrifice. To
know this and to put the knowledge into practice is to know the secret of
sacrifice. In fine, unless man uses all his physical, mental and spiritual gifts
in the service of mankind, he is a thief unfit for Freedom. He who uses his
intellect only and spares his body is not a full sacrificer. Unless the mind and
the body and the soul are made to work in unison, they cannot be adequately
used for the service of mankind. Physical, mental and spiritual purity is
essential for the harmonious working. Therefore man should concentrate on
developing, purifying, and turning to the best of all his faculties.
33. Knowledge-sacrifice is better, O-Parantapa, than material sacrifice, for all
action which does not bind finds its consummation in Knowledge (jnana).
Who does not know that works of charity performed without knowledge
often result in great harm? Unless every act, however nobel its motive, is
informed with knowledge, it lacks perfection. Hence the complete fulfillment
of all action is in knowledge.
34. The masters of knowledge who have seen the Truth will impart to thee this
Knowledge; learn it through humble homage and service and by repeated
questioning.
The three conditions of knowledge—homage, repeated questioning and
service—deserve to be carefully borne in mind in this age. Homage or
obeisance means humility and service is a necessary accompaniment; else it
would be mock homage. Repeated questioning is equally essential, for
without a keen spirit of inquiry, there is no knowledge. All this presupposes
devotion to and faith in the person approached. There can be no humility,
much less service, without faith.
35. When thou hast gained this knowledge, O Pandava, thou shalt not again fall
into such error; by virtue of it thou shalt see all beings without exception in
thyself and thus in Me.
The adage ‘Yatha pinde tatha brahmande'—‘as with the self so with the
universe') means the same thing. He who has attained Self-realization sees no
difference between himself and others.

28


36. Even though thou be the most sinful of sinners, thou shalt cross the ocean of
sin by the boat of knowledge.
37. As a blazing fire turns its fuel to ashes, O Arjuna, even so the fire of
Knowledge turns all actions to ashes.
38. There is nothing in this world so purifying as Knowledge. He who is
perfected by yoga finds it in himself in the fullness of time.
39. It is the man of faith who gains knowledge—the man who is intent on it and
who has mastery over his senses; having gained knowledge, he comes ere long
to the supreme peace.
40. But the man of doubt, without knowledge and without faith, is lost; for him
who is given to doubt there is neither this world nor that beyond, nor
happiness.
41. He who has renounced all action by means of yoga, who has severed all
doubt by means of knowledge—him self-possessed, no actions bind, O
Dhananjaya!
42. Therefore, with the sword of Self-realization sever thou this doubt, bred of
ignorance, which has crept into thy heart! Betake thyself to yoga and arise, O
Bharata!
Thus ends the fourth discourse, entitled ‘Jnana-Karma-Sannyasa-Yoga' in the
converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the
knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 5
1. Thou laudest renunciation of actions, O Krishna, whilst at the same time thou
laudest performance of action; tell me for a certainty which is the better.
The Lord Said:
2. Renunciation and performance of action both lead to salvation; but of the
two, karmayoga (performance) is better than sannyasa (renunciation).

29


3. Him one should know as ever renouncing who has no dislikes and likes; for
he who is free from the pairs of opposites is easily released from bondage.
That is, not renunciation of action but of attachment to the pairs determines
true renunciation. A man who is always in action may be a good sannyasa
(renouncer) and another who may be doing no work may well be a hypocrite.
See III. 6.
4. It is the ignorant who speak of sankhya and yoga as different, not so those
who have knowledge. He who is rightly established even in one wins to the
fruit of both.
The yogi engrossed in sankhya (knowledge)lives even in thought for the
good of the world and attains the fruit of karmayoga by the sheer power of
his thought. The karmayogi ever engrossed in unattached action naturally
enjoys the peace of the jnanayogi.
5. The goal that the sankhyas attain is also reached by the yogins. He sees truly
who sees both sankhya and yoga as one.
6. But renunciation, O Mahabahu, is hard to attain except by yoga; the ascetic
equipped with yoga attains Brahman ere long.
7. The yogi who has cleared himself, has gained mastery over his mind and all
his senses, who has become one with the Atman in all creation, although he acts
he remains unaffected.
8. The yogi who has seen the Truth knows that it is not he that acts whilst
seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, walking, sleeping, or breathing,
9. Talking, letting go, holding fast, opening or closing the eyes—in the
conviction that is the senses that are moving in their respective spheres.
So long as ‘self' endures, this detachment cannot be achieved. A sensual man
therefore may not shelter himself under the pretence that it is not he but his
senses that are acting. Such a mischievous interpretation betrays a gross
ignorance of the Gita and right conduct. The next shloka makes this clear.
10. He who dedicates his actions to Brahman and performs them without
attachment is not smeared by sin, as the lotus-leaf by water.
11. Only with the body, mind and intellect and also with the senses, do the
yogins perform action without attachment for the sake of self-purification.
12. A man of yoga obtains everlasting peace by abandoning the fruit of action;
the man ignorant of yoga, selfishly attached to fruit, remains bound.
30


13. Renouncing with the mind all actions, the dweller in the body, who is
master of himself, rests happily in his city of nine gates, neither doing nor
getting anything done.
The principal gates of the body are the two eyes, the two nostrils, the two
ears, the mouth, and the two organs of excretion—though really speaking the
countless pores of the skin are no less gates. If the gatekeeper always remains
on the alert and performs his task, letting in or out only the objects that
deserve ingress or egress, then of him it can truly be said that he has no part
in the ingress or egress, but that he is a passive witness. He thus does nothing
nor gets any thing done.
14. The Lord creates neither agency nor action for the world; neither does he
connect action with its fruit. It is nature that is at work.
God is no doer. The inexorable law of karma prevails, and in the very
fulfillment of the law—giving everyone his deserts, making everyone reap
what he sows—lies God's abounding mercy and justice. In undiluted justice
is mercy. Mercy which is inconsistent with justice is not mercy but its
opposite. But man is not a judge knowing past, present, and future. So for
him the law is reversed and mercy or forgiveness is the purest justice. Being
himself ever liable to be judged he must accord to others what he would
accord to himself, viz. forgiveness. Only by cultivating the spirit of
forgiveness can he reach the state of a yogi, whom no actions bind, the man
of even-mindedness, the man skilled in action.
15. The Lord does not take upon Himself anyone's vice or virtue; it is ignorance
that veils knowledge and deludes all creatures.
The delusion lies in man arrogating to himself the authorship of action and
the attributing to God the consequences thereof—punishment or reward as
the case may be.
16. But to them whose ignorance is destroyed by the knowledge of Atman, this
their knowledge, like the sun, reveals the Supreme.
17. Those whose intellect is suffused with That, whose self has become one with
That, who abide in That, and whose end and aim is that, wipe out their sins
with knowledge, and go whence there is no return.
18. The men of Self-realization look with an equal eye on a brahmana
possessed of learning and humility, a cow, an elephant, a dog and even a
dog-eater.
That is to say, they serve every one of them alike, according to the needs of
each. Treating a brahmana and shwapaka (dog-eater) alike means that the wise

31


man will suck the poison off a snake-bitten shwapaka with as much eagerness
and readiness as he would from a snake-bitten brahmana.
19. In this very body they have conquered the round of birth and death, whose
mind is anchored in sameness; for perfect Brahman is same to all, therefore in
Brahman they rest.
As a man thinks, so he becomes, and therefore those whose minds are bent
on being the same to all achieve that sameness and become one with
Brahman.
20. He whose understanding is secure, who is undeluded, who knows Brahman
and who rests in Brahman, will neither be glad to get what is pleasant, nor sad
to get what is unpleasant.
21. He who has detached himself from contacts without, finds bliss in Atman;
having achieved union with Brahman he enjoys eternal bliss.
He who has weaned himself from outward objects to the inner Atman is
fitted for union with Brahman and the highest bliss. To withdraw oneself
from contacts without and to bask in the sunshine of union with Brahman are
two aspects of the same state, two sides of the same coin.
22. For the joys derived from sense-contacts are nothing but mines of misery;
they have beginning and end, O Kaunteya; the wise man does not revel therein.
23. The man who is able even here on earth, ere he is released from the body, to
hold out against the floodtide of lust and wrath,—he is a yogi, he is happy.
As a corpse has no likes and dislikes, no sensibility to pleasure and pain,
even so he who though alive is dead to these, he truly lives, he is truly happy.
24. He who finds happiness only within, rest only within, light only
within,—that yogi, having become one with nature, attains to oneness with
Brahman.
25. They win oneness with Brahman—the seers whose sins are wiped out,
whose doubts are resolved, who have mastered themselves, and who are
engrossed in the welfare of all beings.
26. Rid of lust and wrath, masters of themselves, the ascetics who have realized
Atman find oneness with Brahman everywhere around them.
27-28. That ascetic is ever free—who, having shut out the outward
sense-contacts, sits with his gaze fixed between the brows, outward and inward
breathing in the nostrils made equal; his senses, mind, and reason held in check;
rid of longing, fear and wrath; and intent on Freedom.
32


These shlokas refer to some of the yogic practices laid down in the
Yoga-sutras. A word of caution is necessary regarding these practices. They
serve for the yogin the same purpose as athletics and gymnastics do for the
bhogin (who pursues worldly pleasures). His physical exercises help the
latter to keep his senses of enjoyment in full vigour. The yogic practices help
the yogin to keep his body in condition and his senses in subjection. Men
versed in these practices are rare in these days, and few of them turn them to
good account. He who has achieved the preliminary stage on the path to
self-discipline, he who has a passion for Freedom, and who having rid
himself of the pairs of opposites has conquered fear, would do well to go in
for these practices which will surely help him. It is such a disciplined man
alone who can, through these practices, render his body a holy temple of
God. Purity both of the mind and body is a sine qua non, without which
these processes are likely, in the first instance, to lead a man astray and then
drive him deeper into the slough of delusion. That this has been the result in
some cases many know from actual experience. That is why that prince of
yogins, Patanjali gave the first place to yamas (cardinal vows) and niyamas
(casual vows), and held as eligible for yogic practices only those who have
gone through the preliminary discipline.
The five cardinal vows are: non-violence, truth, non-stealing, celibacy,
non-possession. The five casual vows are: bodily purity, contentment, the
study of the scriptures, austerity, and meditation of God.
29. Knowing Me as the Acceptor of sacrifice and austerity, the great Lord of all
the worlds, the Friend of all creation, the yogi attains to peace.
This shloka may appear to be in conflict with shlokas 14 and 15 of this
discourse and similar ones in other discourses. It is not really so. Almighty
God is Doer and non-Doer, Enjoyer and non-Enjoyer both. He is
indescribably, beyond the power of human speech. Man somehow strives to
have a glimpse of Him and in so doing invests Him with diverse and even
contradictory attributes.
Thus ends the fifth discourse, entitled ‘Sannyasa Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman, in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 6

33


1. He who performs all obligatory action, without depending on the fruit
thereof, is a sannyasin and a yogin—not the man who neglects the sacrificial
fire nor he who neglects action.
Fire here may be taken to mean all possible instruments of action. Fire was
needed when sacrifices used to be performed with its help. Assuming that
spinning were a means of universal service in this age, a man by neglecting
the spinning wheel would not become a sannyasi.
2. What is called sannyasa, know thou to be yoga, O Pandava; for none can
become a yogin who has not renounced selfish purpose.
3. For the man who seeks to scale the heights of yoga, action is said to be the
means; for the same man, when he has scaled those heights, repose is said to be
the means.
He who has purged himself of all impurities and who has achieved
even-mindedness will easily achieve Self-realization. But this does not mean
that he who has scaled the heights of yoga will disdain to work for the
guidance of the world. On the contrary that work will be to him not only the
breath of his nostrils, but also as natural to him as breathing. He will do so by
the sheer force of will. See V. 4.
4. When a man is not attached either to the objects of sense or to actions and
sheds all selfish purpose, then he is said to have scaled the heights of yoga.
5. By one's Self should one raise oneself, and not allow oneself to fall; for Atman
(Self) alone is the friend of self, and Self alone is self's foe.
6. His Self alone is friend, who has conquered himself by his Self: but to him
who has not conquered himself and is thus inimical to himself, even his Self
behaves as foe.
7. Of him who has conquered himself and who rests in perfect calm the self is
completely composed, in cold and heat, in pleasure and pain, in honour and
dishonour.
8. The yogin who is filled with the contentment of wisdom and discriminative
knowledge, who is firm as a rock, who has mastered his senses, and to whom a
clod of earth, a stone and gold are the same, is possessed of yoga.
9. He excels who regards alike the boon companion, the friend, the enemy, the
stranger, the mediator, the alien and the ally, as also the saint and the sinner.
10. Let the yogi constantly apply his thought to Atman remaining alone in a
scheduled place, his mind and body in control, rid of desires and possessions.
34


11. Fixing for himself, in a pure spot, a firm seat, neither too high nor yet too
low, covered with kusha grass, thereon a deerskin, and thereon a cloth;
12. Sitting on that seat, with mind concentrated, the functions of thought and
sense of control, he should set himself to the practice of yoga for the sake of
self-purification.
13. Keeping himself steady, holding the trunk, the neck and the head in a
straight line and motionless, fixing his eye on the tip of his nose, and looking
not around.
14. Tranquil in spirit, free from fear, steadfast in the vow of brahmacharya,
holding his mind in control, the yogi should sit, with all his thoughts on Me,
absorbed in Me.
Brahmacharya (usually translated ‘celibacy') means not only sexual
continence but observance of all the cardinal vows for the attainment of
Brahman.
15. The yogi, who ever thus, with mind controlled, unites himself to Atman,
wins the peace which culminates in Nirvana, the peace that is in Me.
16. Yoga is not for him who eats too much, nor for him who fasts too much,
neither for him who sleeps too much, nor yet for him who is too wakeful.
17. To him who is disciplined in food and recreation, in effort in all activities,
and in sleep and waking, yoga (discipline) becomes a relief from all ills.
18. When one's thought, completely controlled, rests steadily on only Atman,
when one is free from longing for all objects of desire, then one is called a yogin.
19. As a taper in a windless spot flickers not, even so is a yogin, with his
thought controlled, seeking to unite himself with Atman.
20. Where thought curbed by the practice of yoga completely ceases, where a
man sits content within himself, Atman having seen Atman;
21. Where he experiences that endless bliss beyond the senses which can be
grasped by reason alone; wherein established he swerves not from the Truth;
22. Where he holds no other gain greater than that which he has gained; and
where, securely seated, he is not shaken by any calamity however great;
23. That state should be known as yoga (union with the Supreme), the disunion
from all union with pain. This yoga must one practice with firm resolve and
unwearying zeal.
35


24. Shaking oneself completely free from longings born of selfish purpose;
reining in the whole host of senses, from all sides, with the mind itself;
25. With reason held securely by the will, he should gradually attain calm and
with the mind established in Atman think of nothing.
26. Wherever the fickle and unsteady mind wanders, thence should it be reined
and brought under the sole sway of Atman.
28. The yogin, cleansed of all stain, unites himself ever thus to Atman, easily
enjoys the endless bliss of contact with Brahman.
29. The man equipped with yoga looks on all with an impartial eye, seeing
Atman in all beings and all beings in Atman.
30. He who sees Me everywhere and everything in Me, never vanishes from Me
nor I from him.
31. The yogin who, anchored in unity, worships Me abiding in all beings, lives
and moves in me, no matter how he live and move.
So long as ‘self' subsists, the Supreme Self is absent; when ‘self' is
extinguished, the Supreme Self is seen everywhere. Also see note on XIII. 23.
32. He who, by likening himself with others, senses pleasure and pain equally
for all as for himself, is deemed to be the highest yogi, O Arjuna.
Arjuna Said:
33. I do not see, O Madhusudana, how this yoga, based on the
equal-mindedness that Thou hast expounded to me, can steadily endure,
because of fickleness (of the mind).
34. For fickle is the mind, O Krishna, unruly, overpowering and stubborn; to
curb it is, I think, as hard as to curb the wind.
The Lord Said:
35. Undoubtedly, O Mahabahu, the mind is fickle and hard to curb; yet, O
Kaunteya, it can be held in check by constant practice and dispassion.
36. Without self-restraint, yoga, I hold, is difficult to attain; but the
self-governed soul can attain it by proper means, if he strives for it.
Arjuna Said:

36


37. If one, possessed of faith, but slack of effort, because of his mind straying
from yoga, reach not perfection in yoga, what end does he come to, O Krishna?
38. Without a foothold, and floundering in the path to Brahman fallen from
both, is he indeed not lost, O Mahabahu, like a dissipated cloud?
39. This my doubt, O Krishna, do thou dispel utterly; for there is to be found
none other than thou to banish this doubt.
The Lord Said:
40. Neither in this world, nor in the next, can there be ruin for him, O Partha; no
well-doer, oh loved one, meets with a sad end.
41. Fallen from yoga, a man attains the worlds of righteous souls, and having
dwelt there for numberless years is then born in a house of pure and gentle
blood.
42. Or he may even be born into a family of yogins, though such birth as this is
all too rare in this world.
43. There, O Kurunandana, he discovers the intellectual stage he had reached in
previous birth, and thence he stretches forward again towards perfection.
44. By virtue of that previous practice he is borne on, whether he will it or not,
even he with a desire to know yoga passes beyond the Vedic ritual.
45. But the yogi who perseveres in his striving, cleansed of sin, perfected
through many births, reaches the highest state.
46. The yogin is deemed higher than the man of austerities; he is deemed also
higher than the man of knowledge; higher is he than the man engrossed in
ritual; therefore be thou a yogin, O Arjuna!
47. And among all yogins, he who worships Me with faith, his inmost self all
rapt in Me, is deemed by me to be the best yogin.
Thus ends the sixth discourse entitled ‘Dhyana Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 7
1. Hear, O Partha, how, with thy mind rivetted on me, by practicing yoga and
making me the sole refuge, thou shalt, without doubt, know me fully.
2. I will declare to thee, in its entirety, this knowledge, combined with
discriminative knowledge, which when thou hast known there remains here
nothing more to be known.
3. Among thousands of men hardly one strives after perfection; among those
who strive hardly one knows Me in truth.
4. Earth, Water, Fire, Air, Ether, Mind, Reason and Ego—thus eightfold is my
prakriti divided.
The eightfold prakriti is substantially the same as the field described in XIII.
5 and the perishable Being in XV. 16.
5. This is My lower aspect; but know thou My other aspect, the higher—which
is Jiva (the Vital Essence) by which, O Mahabahu, this world is sustained.
6. Know that these two compose the source from which all beings spring; I am
the origin and end of the entire universe.
7. There is nothing higher than I, O Dhananjaya; all this is strung on Me as a
row of gems upon a thread.
8. In water I am the savour, O Kaunteya; in the sun and the moon I am the light;
the syllable AUM in all the Vedas; the sound in ether, and manliness in men.
9. I am the sweet fragrance in earth; the brilliance in fire; the life in all beings;
and the austerity in ascetics.
10. Know Me, O Partha, to be the primeval seed of all beings; I am the reason of
rational beings and the splendour of the splendid.
11. Of the strong, I am the strength, divorced from lust and passion; in beings I
am desire undivorced from righteousness.
12. Know that all the manifestations of the three gunas, sattva, rajas, and tamas,
proceed from none but Me; yet I am not in them; they are in Me.
God is not dependent on them, they are dependent on Him. Without Him
those various manifestations would be impossible.
13. Befogged by these manifestations of the three gunas, the entire world fails to
recognize Me, the imperishable, as transcending them.
38


14. For this My divine delusive mystery made up of the three gunas is hard to
pierce; but those who make Me their sole refuge pierce the veil.
15. The deluded evil-doers, lowest of men, do not see refuge in Me; for, by
reason of this delusive mystery, they are bereft of knowledge and given to
devilish ways.
16. Four types of well-doers are devoted to Me, O Arjuna; they are, O
Bharatarshabha, the afflicted, the spiritual seeker, the material seeker, and the
enlightened.
17. Of these the enlightened, ever attached to Me in single-minded devotion, is
the best; for to the enlightened I am exceedingly dear and he is dear to Me.
18. All these are estimable indeed, but the enlightened I hold to be My very self;
for he, the true yogi, is stayed on Me alone, the supreme goal.
19. At the end of many births the enlightened man finds refuge in Me; rare
indeed is this great soul to whom ‘Vasudeva is all'.
20. Men, bereft of knowledge by reason of various longings, seek refuge in
other gods, pinning their faith on diverse rites, guided by their own nature.
21. Whatever form one desires to worship in faith and devotion, in that very
form I make that faith of his secure.
22. Possessed of that faith he seeks a propitiate that one, and obtains
therethrough his longings, dispensed in truth by none but Me.
23. But limited is the fruit that falls to those shortsighted ones; those who
worship the gods go to the gods, those who worship Me come unto Me.
24. Not knowing My transcendent, imperishable, supreme character, the
undiscerning think Me who am unmanifest to have become manifest.
25. Veiled by the delusive mystery created by My unique power, I am not
manifest to all; this bewildered world does not recognize Me, birthless and
changeless.
Having the power to create this world of sense and yet unaffected by it, He is
described as having unique power.
26. I know, O Arjuna, all creatures past, present and to be; but no one knows
Me.

39


27. All creatures in this universe are bewildered, O Parantapa, by virtue of the
delusion of the pairs of opposite sprung from likes and dislikes, O Bharata.
28. But those virtuous men whose sin has come to an end, freed from delusion
and of the pairs of opposites, worship Me in steadfast faith.
29. Those who endeavour for freedom from age and death by taking refuge in
Me, know in full that Brahman, Adhyatma and all Karma.
30. Those who know Me, including Adhibhuta, Adhidaiva, Adhiyajna,
possessed of even-mindedness, they know Me even at the time of passing away.
The terms in italics are defined in the next discourse the subject of which is
indicated in 29-30. The sense is that every nook and cranny of the universe is
filled with Brahman, that He is the sole Agent of all action, and that the man
who imbued to Him, becomes one with Him at the time of passing hence. All
his desires are extinguished in his vision of Him and he wins his freedom.
Thus ends the seventh discourse, entitled ‘Jananvijnana Yoga' in the converse of
Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 8
1. What is that Brahman? What is Adhyatma? What Karma, O Purushottama?
What is called Adhibhuta? And what Adhidaiva?
2. And who here in this body is Adhiyajna and how? And how at the time of
death art Thou to be known by the self-controlled?
The Lord Said:
3. The Supreme, the Imperishable is Brahman; its manifestation is Adhyatma;
the creative process whereby all beings are created is called Karma.
4. Adhibhuta is My perishable form; Adhidaivata is the individual self in that
form; and O best among the embodied, Adhiyajna am I in this body, purified by
sacrifice.
That is, from Imperishable Unmanifest down to the perishable atom
everything in the universe is the Supreme and an expression of the Supreme.
40


Why then should mortal man arrogate to himself authorship of anything
rather than do His bidding and dedicate all action to Him?
5. And he who, at the last hour remembering Me only, departs leaving the
body, enters into Me; of that there is no doubt.
6. Or whatever form a man continually contemplates, that same he remembers
in the hour of death, and to that very form he goes, O Kaunteya.
7. Therefore at all times remember Me and fight on; thy mind and reason thus
on Me fixed thou shalt surely come to Me.
8. With thought steadied by constant practice, and wandering nowhere, he who
meditates on the Supreme Celestial Being, O Partha, goes to Him.
9-10. Whoso, at the time of death, with unwavering mind, with devotion, and
fixing the breath rightly between the brows by the power of yoga, meditates on
the Sage, the Ancient, the Ruler, subtler than the subtlest, the Supporter of all,
the Inconceivable, glorious as the sun beyond the darkness,—he goes to that
Supreme Celestial Being.
11. That which the knowers of the Vedas call the Imperishable (or that word
which the knowers of the Vedas repeat), wherein the ascetics freed from
passion enter and desiring which they practice brahmacharya, that Goal (or
Word) I will declare to thee in brief.
12. Closing all the gates, locking up the mind in the hridaya, fixing his breath
within the head, rapt in yogic meditation;
13. Whoso departs leaving the body uttering AUM—Brahman in one
syllable—repeatedly thinking on Me, he reaches the highest state.
14. That yogi easily wins to Me, O Partha, who, ever attached to Me, constantly
remembers Me with undivided mind.
15. Great souls, having come to Me, reach the highest perfection; they come not
again to birth, unlasting and (withal) an abode of misery.
16. From the world of Brahma down, all the worlds are subject to return, O
Arjuna; but on coming to Me there is no rebirth.
17. Those men indeed know what is Day and what is Night, who know that
Brahma's day lasts a thousand yugas and that his night too is a thousand yugas
long.
That is to say, our day and night of a dozen hours each are less than the
infinitesimal fraction of a moment in that vast cycle of time. Pleasures
41


pursued during these incalculably small moments are as illusory as a mirage.
Rather than waste these brief moments, we should devote them to serving
God through service of mankind. On the other hand, our time is such a small
drop in the ocean of eternity that if we fail of our object here, viz.
Self-realization, we need not despair. She should bide our time.
18. At the coming of Day all the manifest spring forth from the Unmanifest, and
at the coming of Night they are dissolved into that same Unmanifest.
Knowing this too, man should understand that he has very little power over
things, the round of birth and death is ceaseless.
19. This same multitude of creatures come to birth, O Partha, again and again;
they are dissolved at the coming of Night, whether they will or not; and at the
break of Day they are re-born.
20. But higher than the Unmanifest is another Unmanifest Being, everlasting,
which perisheth not when all creatures perish.
21. This Unmanifest, named the Imperishable, is declared to be the highest goal.
For those who reach it there is no return. That is my highest abode.
22. This Supreme Being, O Partha, may be won by undivided devotion; in It all
beings dwell, by It all is pervaded.
23. Now I will tell thee, Bharatarshabha, the conditions which determine the
exemption from return, as also the return, of yogins after they pass away hence.
24. Fire, Light, Day, the Bright Fortnight, the six months of the Northern
Solstice—through these departing men knowing Brahman go to Brahman.
25. Smoke, Night, the Dark Fortnight, the six months of the Southern
Solstice—Therethrough the yogin attains to the lunar light and thence returns.
I do not understand the meaning of these two shlokas. They do not seem to
me to be consistent with the teaching of the Gita. The Gita teaches that he
whose heart is meek with devotion, who is devoted to unattached action and
has seen the Truth must win salvation, no matter when he dies. These
shlokas seem to run counter to this. They may perhaps be stretched to mean
broadly that a man of sacrifice, a man of light, a man who has known
Brahman finds release from birth if he retains that enlightenment at the time
of death, and that on the contrary the man who has none of these attributes
goes to the world of the moon—not at all lasting—and returns to birth. The
moon, after all, shines with borrowed light.
26. These two paths—bright and dark—are deemed to be the eternal paths of
the world; by the one a man goes to return not, by the other he returns again.
42


The Bright one may be taken to mean the path of knowledge and the dark
one that of ignorance.
27. The Yogin knowing these two paths falls not into delusion, O Partha;
therefore, at all times, O Arjuna, remain steadfast in yoga.
"Will not fall into delusion" means that he who knows the two paths and has
known the secret of even-mindedness will not take the path of ignorance.
28. Whatever fruit of good deeds is laid down as accruing from (a study of) the
Vedas, from sacrifices, austerities, and acts of charity—all that the yogin
transcends, on knowing this, and reaches the Supreme and Primal Abode.
He who has achieved even-mindedness by dint of devotion, knowledge and
service not only obtains the fruit of all his good actions, but also wins
salvation.
Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled ‘Brahma Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 9
1. I will now declare to thee, who art uncensorious, this mysterious knowledge,
together with discriminative knowledge, knowing which thou shalt be released
from ill.
2. This is the king of sciences, the king of mysteries, pure and sovereign, capable
of direct comprehension, the essence of dharma, easy to practice, changeless.
3. Men who have no faith in this doctrine, O Parantapa, far from coming to Me,
return repeatedly to the path of this world of death.
4. By Me, unmanifest in form, this whole world is pervaded; all beings are in
Me, I am not in them.
5. And yet those beings are not in Me. That indeed is My unique power as Lord!
Sustainer of all beings, I am not in them; My Self brings them into existence.
The sovereign power of God lies in this mystery, this miracle, that all beings
are in Him and yet not in Him, He in them and yet not in them. This is the
43


description of God in the language of mortal man. Indeed He soothes man by
revealing to him all His aspects by using all kinds of paradoxes. All beings
are in him inasmuch as all creation is His; but as He transcends it all, as He
really is not the author of it all, it may be said with equal truth that the beings
are not in Him. He really is in all His true devotees, He is not, according to
them, in those who deny Him. What is this if not a mystery, a miracle of God?
6. As the mighty wind, moving everywhere, is ever contained in ether, even so
know that all beings are contained in Me.
7. All beings, O Kaunteya, merge into my prakriti, at the end of a kalpa, and I
send them forth again when a kalpa begins.
8. Resorting to my prakriti, I send forth again and again this multitude of
beings, powerless under the sway of prakriti.
9. But all this activity, O Dhananjaya, does not bind Me, seated as one
indifferent, unattached to it.
10. With me as Presiding Witness, prakriti gives birth to all that moves and does
not move; and because of this, O Kaunteya, the wheel of the world keeps going.
11. Not knowing My transcendent nature as the sovereign Lord of all beings,
fools condemn Me incarnated as man.
For they deny the existence of God and do not recognize the Director in the
human body.
12. Vain are the hopes, actions and knowledge of those witless ones who have
resorted to the delusive nature of monsters and devils.
13. But those great souls who resort to the divine nature, O Partha, know Me as
the Imperishable Source of all beings and worship Me with an undivided mind.
14. Always declaring My glory, striving in steadfast faith, they do Me devout
homage; ever attached to Me, they worship Me.
15. Yet others, with knowledge-sacrifice, worship Me, who am to be seen
everywhere, as one, as different or as many.
16. I am the sacrificial vow; I am the sacrifice; I the ancestral oblation; I the herb;
I the sacred text; I the clarified butter; I the fire; I the burnt offering.
17. Of this universe I am the Father, Mother, Creator, Grandsire: I am what is to
be known, the sacred syllable AUM; the rig, the Saman and the Yajus;

44


18. I am the Goal, the Sustainer, the Lord, the Witness, the Abode, the Refuge,
the Friend; the Origin, the End the Preservation, the Treasurehouse, the
Imperishable Seed.
19. I give heat; I hold back and pour forth rain; I am deathlessness and also
death. O Arjuna, Being and not-Being as well.
20. Followers of the three Vedas, who drink the soma juice and are purged of
sin, worship Me with sacrifice and pray for going to heaven; they reach the holy
world of the gods and enjoy in heaven the divine joys of the gods.
The reference is to the sacrificial ceremonies and rites in vogue in the days of
the Gita. We cannot definitely say what they were like nor what the soma
juice exactly was.
21. They enjoy the vast world of heaven, and their merit spent, they enter the
world of the mortals; thus those who, following the Vedic law, long for the fruit
of their action earn but the round of birth and death.
22. As for those who worship Me, thinking on Me alone and nothing else, ever
attached to Me, I bear the burden of getting them what they need.
There are thus three unmistakable marks of a true yogi or
bhakta—even-mindedness, skill in action, undivided devotion. These three
must be completely harmonized in a yogi. Without devotion there is no
even-mindedness, without even-mindedness no devotion, and without skill
in action devotion and even-minded might well be a pretense.
23. Even those who, devoted to other gods, worship them in full faith, even
they, O Kaunteya, worship none but Me, though not according to the rule.
‘Not according to the rule' means not knowing Me as the Impersonal and the
Absolute.
24. For I am the Acceptor and the Director of all sacrifices; but not recognizing
Me as I am, they go astray.
25. Those who worship the gods go to the gods; those who worship the manes
go to the manes; those who worship the spirits go to the spirits; but those who
worship Me come to Me.
26. Any offering of leaf, flower, fruit or water, made to Me in devotion, by an
earnest soul, I lovingly accept.
That is to say, it is the Lord in every being whom we serve with devotion who
accepts the service.
45


27. Whatever thou doest, whatever thou eatest, whatever thou offerest as
sacrifice or gift, whatever austerity thou dost perform, O kaunteya, dedicate all
to Me.
28. So doing thou shalt be released from the bondage of action, yielding good
and evil fruit; having accomplished both renunciation and performance, thou
shalt be released (from birth and death) and come unto Me.
29. I am the same to all beings; with Me there is non disfavoured, none
favoured; but those who worship Me with devotion are in Me and I in them.
30. A sinner, howsoever great, if he turns to Me with undivided devotion, must
indeed be counted a saint; for he has a settled resolve.
The undivided devotion subdues both his passions and his evil deeds.
31. For soon he becomes righteous and wins everlasting peace; know for a
certainty, O kaunteya, that my bhakta never perishes.
32. For finding refuge in Me, even those who though are born of the womb of
sin, women, vaishyas, and shudras too, reach the supreme goal.
33. How much more then, the pure brahmanas and seer-kings who are my
devotees? Do thou worship Me, therefore, since thou hast come to this fleeting
and joyless world.
34. On Me fix thy mind, to Me bring thy devotion, to Me offer thy sacrifice, to
Me make thy obeisance; thus having attached thyself to Me and made Me thy
end and aim, to Me indeed shalt thou come.
Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled ‘Rajavidya-rajaguhya Yoga' in the
converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the
knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 10
1. Yet once more, O Mahabahu, here My supreme word, which I will utter to
thee, gratified one, for thy benefit.
2. Neither the gods nor the great seers know My origin; for I am, every way, the
origin of them both.
46


3. He who knows Me, the great lord of the worlds, as birthless and without
beginning, he among mortals, undeluded, is released from sins.
4. Discernment, knowledge, freedom from delusion, long suffering, truth,
self-restraint, inward calm, pleasure, pain, birth, death, fear and fearlessness;
5. Non-violence, even-mindedness, contentment, austerity, beneficence, good
and ill fame,—all these various attributes of creatures proceed verily from Me.
6. The seven great seers, the ancient four, and the Manus too were born of Me
and of My mind, and of them were born all the creatures in the world.
7. He who knows in truth My immanence and My yoga becomes gifted with
unshakable yoga; of this there is no doubt.
8. I am the source of all, all proceeds from me; knowing this, the wise worship
Me with hearts full of devotion.
9. With me in their thoughts, their whole soul devoted to Me, teaching one
another, with me ever on their lips, they live in contentment and joy.
10. To these, ever in tune with Me worshipping me with affectionate devotion, I
give the power of selfless action, whereby they come to Me.
11. Out of every compassion for them, I who dwell in their hearts, destroy the
darkness, born of ignorance, with the refulgent lamp of knowledge.
Arjuna Said:
12. Lord! Thou art the supreme Brahman, the supreme Abode, the supreme
Purifier! Everlasting Celestial Being, the Primal God, Unborn, All-pervading.
13. Thus have all the seers—the divine seer Narada, Asita, Devala,
Vyasa—declared Thee; and Thou Thyself dost tell me so.
14. All that Thou tellest me is true, I know, O Keshava, verily, Lord, neither the
gods nor the demons know Thy manifestation.
15. Thyself alone Thou knowest by Thyself, O Purushottama, O Source and
Lord of all beings, God of Gods, O Ruler of the universe.
16. Indeed Thou oughtest to tell me of all Thy manifestations, without a
remainder, whereby Thou dost pervade the worlds.
17. O Yogin! constantly meditating on Thee, how am I to know Thee? In what
various aspects am I to think of Thee, O Lord?
47


18. Recount to me yet again, in full detail, Thy unique power and Thy
immanence, O Janardana! For my ears cannot be sated with listening to Thy
life-giving words.
The Lord Said:
19. Yea, I will unfold to thee, O Kurushreshtha, My divine manifestations,—the
chiefest only; for there is no limit to their extent.
20. I am the Atman, O Gudakesha, seated in the heart of every being; I am the
beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.
21. Of the Adityas I am Vishnu; of luminaries, the radiant Sun; of Maruts, I am
Marichi; of constellations, the moon.
22. Of the Vedas I am the Sama Veda; of the gods Indra; of the senses I am the
mind; of beings I am the consciousness.
23. Of Rudras I am Shankara; of Yakshas and Rakshasas Kubera; of Vasus I am
the Fire; of mountains Meru.
24. Of priests, O Partha, know Me to be the chief Brihaspati; of army captains I
am Kartikeya; and of waters the ocean.
25. Of the great seers I am Bhrigu; of words I am the one syllable ‘AUM'; of
sacrifices I am the Japa sacrifice; of things immovable, the Himalaya.
26. Of all trees I am Ashvattha; of the divine seers, Narada; of the heavenly
choir I am Chitraratha; of the perfected I am Kapila the ascetic.
27. Of horses, Know Me to be the Uchchaihshravas born with Amrita; of mighty
elephants I am Airavata; of men, the monarch.
28. Of weapons, I am Vajra; of cows, Kamadhenu; I am Kandarpa, the god of
generation; of serpants I am Vasuki.
29. Of cobras I am Anata; of water-dwellers I am Varuna; of the manes I am
Aryaman; and of the chastisers, Yama.
30. Of demons I am Prahlada; of reckoners, the time; of beasts I am the lion; and
of birds, Garuda.
31. Of cleansing agents I am the Wind; of wielders of weapons, Rama; of fishes I
am the crocodile; of rivers the Ganges.

48


32. Of creations I am the beginning, end and middle, O Arjuna; of sciences, the
science of spiritual knowledge; of debators, the right argument.
33. Of letters, the letter A; of compounds I am the dvandva; I am the
imperishable Time; I am the creator to be seen everywhere.
34. All-seizing Death am I, as the source of things to be; in feminine virtues I am
Kirti (glory), Shri (beauty), Vak (speech), Smriti (memory), Medha
(intelligence), Dhriti (constancy) and Kshama (forgiveness).
35. Of Saman hymns I am Brihat Saman; of metres, Gayatri; of months I am
Margashirsha; of seasons, the spring.
36. Of deceivers I am the dice-play; of the splendid the splendour; I am victory,
I am resolution, I am the goodness of the good.
The ‘dice-play of deceivers' need not alarm one. For the good and evil nature
of things in not the matter in question, it is the directing and immanent
power of God that is being described. Let the deceivers also know that they
are under God's rule and judgment and put away their pride and deceit.
37. Of Vrishnis I am Vasudeva; of Pandavas Dhananjaya; of ascetics I am Vyasa;
and of seers, Ushanas.
38. I am the rod of those that punish; the strategy of those seeking victory; of
secret things I am silence, and the knowledge of those that know.
39. Whatever is the seed of every being, O Arjuna, that am I; there is nothing,
whether moving or fixed, that can be without Me.
40. there is no end to my divine manifestations; what extent of them I have told
thee now is only by way of illustration.
41. Whatever is glorious, beautiful and mighty know thou that all such has
issued from a fragment of My splendour.
42. But why needest thou to learn this at great length, O Arjuna? With but a
part of Myself I stand upholding this universe.
Thus ends the tenth discourse, entitled ‘Vibhuti Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman, in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 11

49



1. Out of Thy grace towards me, thou hast told me the supreme mystery
revealing the knowledge of the Supreme; it has banished my delusion.
2. Of the origin and destruction of beings I have heard from Thee in full detail,
as also Thy imperishable ajesty [sic], O Kamala-patraksha!
3. Thou art indeed as Thou hast described Thyself, Parameshvara! I do crave to
behold, now, that form of Thine as Ishvara.
4. If, Lord, thou thinkest it possible for me to bear the sight, reveal to me, O
Yogeshvara, Thy imperishable form.
The Lord Said:
5. Behold, O Partha, my forms divine in their hundreds and thousands,
infinitely diverse, infinitely various in color and aspect.
6. Behold the Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the two Ashwins, the Maruts;
behold, O Bharata, numerous marvels never revealed before.
7. Behold today, O Gudakesha, in my body, the whole universe, moving and
unmoving, all in one, and whatever else thou cravest to see.
8. But thou canst not see Me with these thine own eyes. I give thee the eye
divine; behold My sovereign power!
Sanjaya Said:
9. With these words, O King, the great Lord of Yoga, Hari, then revealed to
Partha His supreme form as Ishvara.
10. With many mouths and many eyes, many wondrous aspects, many divine
ornaments, and many brandished weapons divine.

50


11. Wearing divine garlands and vestments, annointed with divine perfumes, it
was the form of God, all-marvellous [sic], infinite, seen everywhere.
12. Were the splendour of a thousand suns to shoot forth all at once in the sky
that might perchance resemble the splendour of that Mighty One.
13. Then did Pandava see the whole universe in its manifold divisions gathered
as one in the body of that God of gods.
14. Then Dhananjaya, wonderstruck and thrilled in every fibre of his being,
bowed low his head before the Lord, addressing Him thus with folded hands.
Arjuna Said:
15. With Thy form, O Lord, I see all the gods and the diverse multitudes of
beings, the Lord Brahma, on his lotus-throne and all the seers and serpents
divine.
16. With many arms and bellies, mouths and eyes, I see Thy infinite form
everywhere. Neither Thy end, nor middle, nor beginning, do I see, O Lord of
the Universe, Universal-formed!
17. With crown and mace and disc, a mass of effulgence, gleaming everywhere I
see Thee, so dazzling to the sight, bright with the splendour of the fiery sun
blazing from all sides,—incomprehensible.
18. Thou art the Supreme Imperishable worthy to be known; Thou art the final
resting place of this universe; Thou art the changeless guardian of the Eternal
Dharma; Thou art, I believe, the Everlasting Being.
19. Thou hast no beginning, middle nor end; infinite is Thy might; arms
innumerable; for eyes, the sun and the moon; Thy mouth a blazing fire,
overpowering the universe with Thy radiance.
20. By Thee alone are filled the spaces between heaven and earth and all the
quarters; at the sight of this Thy wondrous terrible form, the three worlds are
sore oppressed, O Mahatman!
21. Here, too, the multitudes of gods are seen to enter Thee; some awe-struck
praise Thee with folded arms; the hosts of great seers and siddhas, ‘All Hail' on
their lips, hymn Thee with songs of praise.
22. The Rudras, Adityas, Vasus, Sadhyas, all the gods, the twin Ashwins,
Maruts, Manes, the hosts of Gandharvas, Yakshas, Asuras and Siddhas—all
gaze on Thee in wonderment.

51


23. At the sight of thy mighty form, O Mahabahu, many-mouthed, with eyes,
arms, thighs and feet innumerable, with many vast bellies, terrible with many
jaws, the worlds feel fearfully oppressed, and so do I.
24. For as I behold Thee touching the sky, glowing, numerous-hued with
gaping mouths and wide resplendent eyes, I feel oppressed in my innermost
being; no peace nor quiet I find, O Vishnu!
25. As I see Thy mouths with fearful jaws, resembling the Fire of Doom, I lose
all sense of direction, and find no relief. Be gracious, O Devesha, O Jagannivasa!
26. All the sons of Dhritarashtra, and with them the crowd of kings, Bhishma,
Drona, and that Karna too, as also our chief warriors—
27. Are hastening into the fearful jaws of Thy terrible mouths. Some indeed,
caught between Thy teeth, are seen, their heads being crushed to atoms.
28. As rivers, in their numerous torrents, run head-long to the sea, even so the
heroes of the world of men rush into Thy flaming mouths.
29. As moths, fast-flying, plunge into blazing fire, straight to their doom, even
so these rush headlong into Thy mouths, to their destruction.
30. Devouring all these from all sides, Thou lappest them with Thy flaming
tongues; Thy fierce rays blaze forth, filling the whole universe with their lustre.
31. Tell me, Lord, who Thou art so dread of form! Hail to Thee, O Devavara! Be
gracious! I desire to know Thee, Primal Lord; for I comprehend not what Thou
dost.
The Lord Said:
32. Doom am I, full-ripe, dealing death to the worlds, engaged in devouring
mankind. Even without slaying them not one of the warriors, ranged for battle
against thee, shall survive.
33. Therefore, do thou arise, and win renown! Defeat thy foes and enjoy a
thriving kingdom. By Me have these already been destroyed; be thou no more
than an instrument, O Savyasachin!
34. Drona, Bhishma, Jayadratha and Karna, as also the other warrior
chiefs—already slain by Me—slay thou! Fight! Victory is thine over the foes in
the field.
Sanjaya Said:

52


35. Hearing this world of Keshava, crown-wearer Arjuna folded his hands, and
trembling made obeisance. Bowing and all hesitant, in faltering accents, he
proceeded to address Krishna once more.
Arjuna Said:
36. Right proper it is, O Hrishikesha, that Thy praise should stir the world to
gladness and tender emotion; the Rakshasas in fear fly to every quarter and all
the hosts of Siddhas do reverent homage.
37. And why should they not bow down to Thee, O Mahatma? Thou art the
First Creator, greater even than Brahma. O Ananta, O Devesha, O Jagannivasa,
Thou art the Imperishable, Being, not-Being, and That which transcends even
these.
38. Thou art the Primal God, the Ancient Being; Thou art the Final Resting Place
of this Universe; Thou art the Knower, the ‘to-be-known', the Supreme Abode;
by Thee, O Myriad-formed, is the universe pervaded.
39. Thou art Vayu, Yama, Agni, Varuna, Shashanka, Prajapati, and
Prapitamaha! All Hail to Thee, a thousand times all hail! Again and yet again all
hail to Thee!
40. All hail to Thee from before and behind! all hail to Thee from every side, O
All; Thy prowess is infinite, Thy might is measureless! Thou holdest all;
therefore Thou art all.
41. If ever in carelessness, thinking of Thee as comrade, I addressed Thee
saying, ‘O Krishna!', ‘O Yadava!' not knowing Thy greatness, in negligence or in
affection,
42. If ever I have been rude to Thee in jest, whilst at play, at rest-time, or at
meals, whilst alone or in company, O Achyuta, forgive Thou my fault—I beg of
Thee, O Incomprehensible!
43. Thou art Father of this world, of the moving and the un-moving; thou art its
adored, its worthiest, Master; there is none equal to Thee; how then any greater
than Thee? Thy power is matchless in the three worlds.
44. Therefore, I prostrate myself before Thee, and beseech Thy grace, O Lord
adorable! As father with son, as comrade with comrade, so shouldst Thou bear,
beloved Lord, with me, Thy loved one.
45. I am filled with joy to see what never was seen before, and yet my heart is
oppressed with fear. Show me that original form of Thine, O Lord! Be gracious,
Devesha, O Jagannivasa!
53


46. I crave to see Thee even as Thou wast, with crown, with mace, and disc in
hand; wear Thou, once more, that four-armed form, O thousand-armed
Vishvamurti!
The Lord Said:
47. It is to favour thee, O Arjuna, that I have revealed to thee, by My own
unique power, this My form Supreme, Resplendent, Universal, Infinite,
Primal—which none save thee has ever seen.
48. Not by the study of the Vedas, not by sacrifice, not by the study of other
scriptures, not by gifts, nor yet by performance of rites or of fierce austerities
can I, in such a form, be seen by any one save thee in the world of men, O
Kurupravira!
49. Be thou neither oppressed nor bewildered to look on this awful form of
Mine. Banish thy fear, ease thy mind, and lo! behold Me once again as I was.
Sanjaya Said.
50. So said Vasudeva to Arjuna, and revealed to him once more His original
form. Wearing again His form benign, the Mahatma consoled him terrified.
Arjuna Said.
51. Beholding again thy benign human form I am come to myself and once
more in my normal state.
The Lord Said:
52. Very hard to behold is that form of Mine which thou hast seen; even the
gods always yearn to see it.
53. Not by the Vedas, not by penance, nor by gifts, nor yet by sacrifice, can any
behold Me in the form that thou hast seen.
54. But by single-minded devotion, O Arjuna, I may in this form be known and
seen, and truly entered into, O Parantapa!
55. He alone comes to me, O Pandava, who does My work, who has made Me
his goal, who is My devotee, who has renounced attachment, who has ill-will
toward none.
Thus ends the eleventh discourse, entitled ‘Vishvarupadarshana Yoga' in the
converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga as part of the
knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
54


DISCOURSE 12
Thus we see that vision of God is possible only through single-minded
devotion. Contents of devotion must follow as a matter of course. This
twelfth discourse should be learnt by hard even if all discourses are not. It is
one of the shortest. The marks of a devotee should be carefully noted.
Arjuna Said:
1. Of the devotees who thus worship Thee, incessantly attached, and those who
worship the Imperishable Unmanifest, which are the better yogins?
The Lord Said:
2. Those I regard as the best yogins who, riveting their minds on Me, ever
attached, worship Me, with the highest faith.
3. But those who worship the Imperishable, the indefinable, the Unmanifest, the
Omnipresent, the Unthinkable, the Rock-seated, the Immovable, the
Unchanging,
4. Keeping the whole host of senses in complete control, looking on all with an
impartial eye, engrossed in the welfare of all beings—these come indeed to Me.
5. Greater is the travail of those whose mind is fixed on the Unmanifest; for it is
hard for embodied mortals to gain the Unmanifest—Goal.
Mortal man can only imagine the Unmanifest, the Impersonal, and as his
language fails him he often negatively describes It as ‘Neti', ‘Neti' (Not That,
Not That). And so even iconoclasts are at bottom no better than
idol-worshippers. To worship a book, to go to church, or to pray with one's
face in a particular direction—all these are forms of worshipping the
Formless in an image or idol. And yet, both the idol-breaker and the
idol-worshipper cannot lose sight of the fact that there is something which is
beyond all form, Unthinkable, Formless, Impersonal, Changeless. The
highest goal of the devotee is to become one with the object of his devotion.
The bhakta extinguishes himself and merges into, becomes, Bhagvan. This
state can best be reached by devoting oneself to some form, and so it is said
that the short cut to the Unmanifest is really the longest and the most
difficult.
6. But those who casting all their actions on Me, making Me their all in all,
worship Me with the meditation of undivided devotion,
7. Of such, whose thoughts are centered on Me, O Partha, I become ere long the
Deliverer from the ocean of this world of death.
55


8. On Me set thy mind, on Me rest thy conviction; thus without doubt shalt thou
remain only in Me hereafter.
9. If thou canst not set thy mind steadily on Me, then by the method of constant
practice seek to win Me, O Dhananjaya.
10. If thou art also unequal to this method of constant practice, concentrate on
service for Me; even thus serving Me thou shalt attain perfection.
11. If thou art unable even to do this, then dedicating all to Me, with mind
controlled, abandon the fruit of action.
12. Better is knowledge than practice, better than knowledge is concentration,
better than concentration is renunciation of the fruit of all action, from which
directly issues peace.
‘Practice' (abhyasa) is the practice of the yoga of meditation and control of
psychic processes; ‘knowledge' (jnana) is intellectual effort; ‘concentration'
(dhyana) is devoted worship. If as a result of all this there is no renunciation
of the fruit of action, ‘practice' is no ‘practice', ‘knowledge' is no ‘knowledge',
and ‘concentration' is no ‘concentration'.
13. Who has ill-will towards none, who is friendly and compassionate, who has
shed all thought of ‘mine' or ‘I', who regards pain and pleasure alike, who is
long-suffering;
14. Who is ever content, gifted with yoga, self-restrained, of firm conviction,
who has dedicated his mind and reason to Me—that devotee (bhakta) of Mine
is dear to Me.
15. Who gives no trouble to the world, to whom the world causes no trouble,
who is free from exultation, resentment, fear and vexation,—that man is dear to
Me.
16. Who expects naught, who is pure, resourceful, unconcerned, untroubled,
who indulges in no undertakings,—that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
17. Who rejoices not, neither frets nor grieves, who covets not, who abandons
both good and ill—that devotee of Mine is dear to Me.
18. Who is same to foe and friend, who regards alike respect and disrespect,
cold and heat, pleasure and pain, who is free from attachment;
19. Who weighs in equal scale blame and praise, who is silent, content with
whatever his lot, who owns no home, who is of steady mind,—that devotee of
Mine is dear to Me.
56


20. They who follow this essence of dharma, as I have told it, with faith,
keeping Me as their goal,—those devotees are exceeding dear to Me.
Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled ‘Bhakti Yoga' in the converse of Lord
Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 13
This discourse treats of the distinction between the body (not-Self) and the
Atman (the Self).
The Lord Said:
1. This body, O Kaunteya, is called the Field; he who knows it is called the
knower of the Field by those who know.
2. And understand Me to be, O Bharata, the knower of the Field in all the Fields;
and the knowledge of the Field and the knower of the Field, I hold, is true
knowledge.
3. What the Field is, what its nature, what its modifications, and whence is
what, as also who He is, and what His power—hear this briefly from Me.
4. This subject has been sung by seers distinctively and in various ways, in
different hymns as also in aphoristic texts about Brahman well reasoned and
unequivocal.
5. The great elements, Individuation, Reason, the Unmanifest, the ten senses,
and the one (mind), and the five spheres of the senses;
6. Desire, dislike, pleasure, pain, association, consciousness, cohesion—this, in
sum, is what is called the Field with its modifications.
The great elements are Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Ether. ‘Individuation' is the
thought of I, or that the body is ‘I'; the ‘Unmanifest' is prakriti or maya; the
ten senses are the five senses of perception—smell, taste, sight, touch and
hearing, and the five organs of action, viz.: the hands, the feet, the tongue,
and the two organs of excretion. The five spheres or objects of the senses are
smell, savour, form, touch, and sound. ‘Association' is the property of the
different organs to co-operate. Dhriti is not patience or constancy but
cohesion, i.e. the property of all the atoms in the body to hold together; from
‘individuation' springs this cohesion. Individuation is inherent in the
unmanifest prakriti. The undeluded man is he who can cast off the
individuation or ego, and having done so the shock of an inevitable thing
57


like death and pairs of opposites caused by sense-contacts fail to affect him.
The Field, subject to all its modifications, has to be abandoned in the end by
the enlightened and the unenlightened alike.
7. Freedom from pride and pretentiousness, nonviolence, forgiveness,
uprightness, service of the Master, purity, steadfastenes, self-restraint;
8. Aversion from sense-objects, absence of conceit, realization of the painfulness
and evil of birth, death, age and disease;
9. Absence of attachment, refusal to be wrapped up in one's children, wife,
home and family, even-mindedness whether good or ill befall;
10. Unwavering and all-exclusive devotion to Me, resort to secluded spots,
distaste for the haunts of men;
11. Settled conviction of the nature of the Atman, perception of the goal of the
knowledge of Truth,—
All this is declared to be Knowledge and the reverse of it is ignorance.
12. I will (now) expound to thee that which is to be known and knowing which
one enjoys immortality; it is the supreme Brahman which has no beginning,
which is called neither Being nor non-Being.
The Supreme can be described neither as Being nor as non-Being. It is
beyond definition or description, above all attributes.
13. Everywhere having hands and feet, everywhere having eyes, heads,
mouths, everywhere having ears, It abides embracing everything in the
universe.
14. Seeming to possess the functions of the senses, It is devoid of all the senses;
It touches naught, upholds all; having no gunas, It experiences the gunas.
15. Without all beings, yet within; immovable yet moving, so subtle that It
cannot be perceived; so far and yet so near It is.
He who knows It is within It, close to It; mobility and immobility, peace and
restlessness, we owe to It, for It has motion and yet is motionless.
16. Undivided, It seems to subsist divided in all beings; this Brahman—That
which is to be known as the Sustainer of all, yet It is their Devourer and
Creator.

58


17. Light of all lights, It is said to be beyond darkness; It is knowledge, the
object of knowledge, to be gained only by knowledge; It is seated in the hearts
of all.
18. Thus have I expounded in brief the Field, Knowledge and That which is to
be known; My devotee, when he knows this, is worthy to become one with Me.
19. Know that Prakriti and Purusha are both without beginning; know that all
the modifications and gunas are born of Prakriti.
20. Prakriti is described as the cause in the creation of effects from causes;
Purusha is described as the cause of the experiencing of pleasure and pain.
21. For the Purusha, residing in Prakriti, experiences the gunas born in Prakriti;
attachment to these gunas is the cause of his birth in good or evil wombs.
Prakriti in common parlance is Maya. Purusha is the Jiva. Jiva acting in
accordance with his nature experiences the fruit of actions arising out of the
three gunas.
22. What is called in this body the Witness, the Assentor, the Sustainer, the
Experiencer, the Great Lord and also the Supreme Atman, is Supreme Being.
23. He who thus knows Purusha and Prakriti with its gunas, is not born again,
no matter how he live and move.
Read in the light of discourses II, IX and XII this shloka may not be taken to
support any kind of libertinism. It shows the virtue of self-surrender and
selfless devotion. All actions bind the self, but if all are dedicated to the Lord
they do not bind, rather they release him. He who has thus extinguished the
‘self or the thought of ‘I' and who acts as ever in the great witness' eye, will
never sin nor err. the self-sense is at the root of all error or sin. Where the ‘I'
has ben extinguished, there is no sin. This shloka shows how to steer clear of
all sin.
24. Some through meditation hold the Atman by themselves in their own self;
others by Sankhya Yoga, and others by Karma Yoga.
25. Yet others, not knowing (Him) thus, worship (Him) having heard from
others; they too pass beyond death, because of devoted adherence to what they
have heard.
26. Wherever something is born, animate or inanimate, know thou
Bharatarshabha, that it issues from the union of the Field and the Knower of the
Field.

59


27. Who sees abiding in all beings the same Parameshvara, imperishable in the
perishable, he sees indeed.
28. When he sees the same Ishvara abiding everywhere alike, he does not hurt
himself by himself and hence he attains the highest goal.
He who sees the same God everywhere merges in Him and sees naught else;
he thus does not yield to passion, does not become his own foe and thus
attains Freedom.
29. Who sees that it is Prakriti that performs all actions and thus (knows) that
Atman performs them not, he sees indeed.
Just as, in the case of a man who is asleep, his "Self" is not the agent of sleep,
but Prakriti, even so the enlightened man will detach his "Self" from all
activities. to the pure everything is pure. Prakriti is not unchaste, it is when
arrogant man takes her as wife that of these twain passion is born.
30. When he sees the diversity of beings as founded in unity and the whole
expanse issuing therefrom, then he attains to Brahman.
To realize that everything rests in Brahman is to attain to the state of
Brahman. Then Jiva becomes Shiva.
31. This imperishable Supreme Atman, O Kaunteya, though residing in the
body, acts not and is not stained, for he has no beginning and no gunas.
32. As the all-pervading ether, by reason of its subtlety, is not soiled even so
Atman pervading every part of the body is not soiled.
33. As the one Sun illumines the whole universe, even so the Master of the Field
illumines the whole field, O Bharata!
34. Those who, with the eyes of knowledge, thus perceive the distinction
between the Field and the Knower of the Field, and (the secret) of the release o
beings from Prakriti, they attain to the Supreme.
Thus ends the thirteenth discourse, entitled ‘Kshetra-kshetrajnavibhaga Yoga'
in the converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of
the knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 14
60



1. Yet again I will expound the highest and the best of all knowledge, knowing
which all the sages passed hence to the highest perfection.
2. By having recourse to this knowledge they became one with Me. They need
not come to birth even at a creation, nor do they suffer at a dissolution.
3. The great prakriti is for me the womb in which I deposit the germ; from it all
beings come to birth, O Bharata.
4. Whatever forms take birth in the various species, the great prakriti is their
Mother and I the seed-giving Father.
5. Sattva, rajas and tamas are the gunas sprung from prakriti; it is they, O
Mahabahu, that keep the imperishable Dweller bound to the body.
6. Of these sattva, being stainless, is light-giving and healing; it binds with the
bond of happiness and the bond of knowledge, O sinless one.
7. Rajas, know thou, is of the nature of passion, the source of thirst and
attachment; it keeps man bound with the bond of action.
8. Tamas, know thou, born of ignorance, is mortal man's delusion; it keeps him
bound with heedlessness, sloth and slumber, O Bharata.
9. Sattva attaches man to happiness, rajas to action, and tamas, shrouding
knowledge, attaches him to heedlessness.
10. Sattva prevails, O Bharata, having overcome rajas and tamas; rajas, when it
has overpowered sattva and tamas; likewise tamas reigns when sattva and rajas
are crushed.
11. When the light—knowledge—shines forth from al the gates of this body,
then it may be known that the sattva thrives.
12. Greed, activity, assumption of undertakings, restlessness, craving—these are
in evidence when rajas flourishes, O Bharatarshabha.
13. Ignorance, dullness, heedlessness, and delusion—these are in evidence
when tamas reigns, O Kurunandana.
14. If the embodied one meets his end whilst sattva prevails, then he attains to
the spotless worlds of the knowers of the Highest.
61


15. If he dies during the reign within him of rajas, he is born among men
attached to action; and if he dies in tamas, he is born in species not endowed
with reason.
16. The fruit of sattvika action is said to be stainless merit. That of rajas is pain
and that of tamas ignorance.
18. Those abiding in sattva rise upwards, those in rajas stay midway, those in
tamas sink downwards.
19. when the seer perceives no agent other than the gunas, and knows Him who
is above the gunas, he attains to My being.
As soon as a man realizes that he is not the doer, but the gunas are the agent,
the ‘self' vanishes, and he goes through all his actions spontaneously, just to
sustain the body. And as the body is meant to subserve the highest end, all
his actions will even reveal detachment and dispassion. Such a seer can easily
have a glimpse of the One who is above the gunas and offer his devotion to
Him.
20. When the embodied one transcends these three gunas which are born of his
contact with the body, he is released from the pain of birth, death and age and
attains deathlessness.
Arjuna Said:
21. What, O Lord, are the marks of him who has transcended the three gunas?
How does he conduct himself? How does he transcend the three gunas?
The Lord Said:
22. He, O Pandava, who does not disdain light, activity, and delusion when
they come into being, nor desires them when they vanish;
23. He, who seated as one indifferent, is not shaken by the gunas, and stays still
and moves not, knowing it is gunas playing their parts;
24. He who holds pleasure and pain alike, who is sedate, who regards as same
earth, stone and gold, who is wise and weighs in equal scale things pleasant
and unpleasant, who is even-minded in praise and blame;
25. Who holds alike respect and disrespect, who is the same to friend and foe,
who indulges in no undertakings—That man is called gunatita.
Shls. 22-25 must be read and considered together. Light activity and delusion,
as we have seen in the foregoing shlokas, are the products or indications of
62


sattva, rajas and tamas respectively. The inner meaning of these verses is that
he who has transcended the gunas will be unaffected by them. A stone does
not desire light, nor does it disdain activity or inertness; it is still, without
having the will to be so. If someone puts it into motion, it does not fret; if
again, it is allowed to lie still, it does not feel that inertness or delusion has
seized it. The difference between a stone and a gunatita is that the latter has
full consciousness and with full knowledge he shakes himself free from the
bonds that bind an ordinary mortal. He has, as a result of his knowledge,
achieved the purpose of a stone. Like the stone he is witness, but not the
doer, of the activities of the gunas or prakriti. Of such jnani one may say that
he is sitting still, unshaken in the knowledge that it is the gunas playing their
parts. We who are every moment of our lives acting as though we are the
doers can only imagine the state, we can hardly experience it. But we can
hitch our waggon to that star and work our way closer and closer towards it
by gradually withdrawing the self from our actions. A gunatita has
experience of his own condition but he cannot describe it, for he who can
describe it ceases to be one. The moment he proceeds to do so, ‘self' peeps in.
The peace and light and bustle and inertness of our common experience are
illusory. The Gita itself has made it clear in so many words that the sattvika
state is the one nearest that of a gunatita. Therefore every one should strive to
develop more and more sattva in himself, believing that some day he will
reach the goal of the state of gunatita.
26. He who serves me in an unwavering and exclusive bhaktiyoga transcends
these gunas and is worthy to become one with Brahman.
27. For I am the very image of Brahman, changeless and deathless, as also of
everlasting dharma and perfect bliss.
Thus ends the fourteenth discourse, entitled ‘Gunatrayavibhaga Yoga' in the
converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the
knowledge of Brahman, in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 15
1. With the root above and branches below, the ashvattha tree, they say, is
impossible; it has Vedic hymns for its leaves; he who knows it knows the Vedas.
Shvah means tomorrow, and ashvattha (na shvopi sthata) means that which
will not last even until tomorrow, i.e. the world of sense which is every
moment in a state of flux. But even though it is perpetually changing, as its
63


root is Brahman or the Supreme, it is imperishable. It has for its protection
and support the leaves of the Vedic hymns, i.e. dharma. He who knows the
world of sense as such and who knows dharma is the real jnani, that man has
really known the Vedas.
2. Above all and below its branches spread, blossoming because of the gunas,
having for their shoots the sense-objects; deep down in the world of men are
ramified its roots, in the shape of the consequences of action.
This is the description of the tree of the world of sense as the unenlightened
see it. They fail to discover its Root above in Brahman and so they are always
attached to the objects of sense. They water the tree with the three gunas and
remain bound to Karman in the world of men.
3. Its form as such is not here perceived, neither is its end, nor beginning, nor
basis. Let man first hew down this deep-rooted Ashvattha with the sure
weapon of detachment;
4. Let him pray to win to that haven from which there is no return and seek to
find refuge in the primal Being from whom has emanated this ancient world of
action.
‘Detachment in shl. 3 here means dispassion, aversion to the objects of the
senses. Unless man is determined to cut himself off from the temptations of
the world of sense he will go deeper into the mire every day. These verses
show that one dare not play with the objects of the senses with impunity.
5. To that imperishable haven those enlightened souls go—who are without
pride and delusion, who have triumphed over the taints of attachment, who are
ever in tune with the Supreme, whose passions have died, who are exempt
from the pairs of opposites, such as pleasure and pain.
6. Neither the sun, nor the moon, nor fire illumine it; men who arrive there
return not—that is My supreme abode.
7. As part indeed of Myself which has been the eternal Jiva in this world of life,
attracts the mind and the five senses from their place in prakriti.
8. When the master (of the body) acquires a body and discards it he carries
these with him wherever he goes, even as the wind carries scents from flower
beds.
9. Having settled himself in the senses—ear, eye, touch, taste, and smell—as
well as the mind, through them he frequents their objects.

64


These objects are the natural objects of the senses. The frequenting or
enjoyment of these would be tainted if there were the sense of ‘I' about it;
otherwise it is pure, even as a child's enjoyment of these objects is innocent.
10. The deluded perceive Him not as He leaves or settles in (a body) or enjoys
(sense objects) in association with the gunas; it is those endowed with the eye of
knowledge who alone see Him.
11. Yogins who strive see Him seated in themselves; the witless ones who have
not cleansed themselves to see Him not, even though they strive.
This does not conflict with the covenant that God has made even with the
sinner in discourse 9. Akritatman (who has not cleansed himself) means one
who has no devotion in him, who has not made up his mind to purify
himself. The most confirmed sinner, if he has humility enough to seek refuge
in surrender to God, purifies himself and succeeds in finding Him. Those
who do not care to observe the cardinal and the casual vows and expect to
find God through bare intellectual exercise are witless, Godless; they will not
find Him.
12. The light in the sun which illumines the whole universe and which is in the
moon and in fire—that light, know thou, is Mine;
13. It is I, who penetrating the earth uphold all beings with My strength, and
becoming the moon—the essence of all sap—nourish all the herbs;
14. It is I who becoming the Vaishvanara Fire and entering the bodies of all that
breathe, assimilate the four kinds of food with the help of the outward and the
inward breaths.
15. And I am seated in the hearts of all, from Me proceed memory, knowledge
and the dispelling of doubts; it is I who am to be known in all the Vedas, I, the
author of Vedanta and the knower of the Vedas.
16. There are two Beings in the world: kshara (perishable) and akshara
(imperishable). Kshara embraces all creatures and their permanent basis is
akshara.
17. The Supreme Being is surely another—called Paramatman who is the
Imperishable Ishvara pervades and supports the three worlds.
18. Because I transcend the kshara and am also higher than the akshara, I am
known in the world and in the Vedas as Purushottama (the Highest Being).
19. He who, undeluded, knows Me as Purushottama, knows all, he worships
Me with all his heart, O Bharata.
65


20. Thus I have revealed to thee, sinless one, this most mysterious shastra; he
who understands this, O Bharata, is a man of understanding, he has fulfilled his
life's mission.
Thus ends the fifteenth discourse, entitled ‘purushottama Yoga' in the converse
of Lord krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the knowledge of
Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 16
This discourse treats of the divine and the devilish heritage.
The Lord Said:
1. Fearlessness, purity of heart, steadfastness in jnana and yoga—knowledge
and action, beneficence, self-restraint, sacrifice, spiritual study, austerity, and
uprightness;
2. Non-violence, truth, slowness to wrath, the spirit of dedication, serenity,
aversion to slander, tenderness to all that lives, freedom from greed, gentleness,
modesty, freedom from levity;
3. Spiritedness, forgiveness, fortitude, purity, freedom from ill-will and
arrogance—these are to be found in one born with the divine heritage, O
Bharata.
4. Pretentiousness, arrogance, self-conceit, wrath, coarseness, ignorance—these
are to be found in one born with the devilish heritage.
5. The divine heritage makes for Freedom, the devilish for bondage. Grieve not,
O Partha; thou art born with a divine heritage.
6. There are two orders of created beings in this world—the divine and the
devilish; the divine order has been described in detail, hear from Me now of the
devilish, O Partha.
7. Men of the devil do not know what they may do and what they may not do;
neither is there any purity, nor right conduct, nor truth to be found in them.
8. ‘Without truth, without basis, without God is the universe,' they say; ‘born of
the union of the sexes, prompted by naught but lust.'
9. Holding this view, these depraved souls, of feeble understanding and of
fierce deeds, come forth as enemies of the world to destroy it.

66


10. Given to insatiable lust, possessed by pretentiousness, arrogance and
conceit, they seize wicked purposes in their delusion, and go about pledged to
uncleaned deeds.
11. Given to boundless cares that end only with their death, making indulgence
or lust their sole goal, convinced that that is all;
12. Caught in a myriad snares of hope, slaves to lust and wrath, they speak
unlawfully to amass wealth for the satisfaction of their appetites.
13. ‘This have I gained today; this aspiration shall I now attain; this wealth is
mine; this likewise shall be mine hereafter;
14. ‘This enemy I have already slain, others also I shall slay; lord of all am I;
enjoyment is mine, perfection is mine, strength is mine, happiness is mine;
15. ‘Wealthy am I, and high-born. What other is like unto me? I shall perform a
sacrifice! I shall give alms! I shall be merry!' Thus think they, by ignorance
deluded;
16. And tossed about by diverse fancies, caught in the net of delusion, stuck
deep in the indulgence of appetites, into foul hell they fall.
17. Wise in their own conceit, stubborn, full of the intoxication of pelf and pride,
they offer nominal sacrifices for show, contrary to the rule.
18. Given to pride, force, arrogance, lust and wrath they are deriders indeed,
scorning Me in their own and other' bodies.
19. These cruel scorners, lowest of mankind and vile, I hurl down again and
again, into devilish wombs.
20. Doomed to devilish wombs, these deluded ones, far from ever coming to
Me, sink lower and lower in birth after birth.
21. Three-fold is the gate of hell, leading man to perdition—Lust, Wrath, and
Greed; these three, therefore, should be shunned.
22. The man who escapes these three gates of Darkness, O Kaunteya, works out
his welfare and thence reaches the highest state.
23. He who forsakes the rule of shastra and does but the bidding of his selfish
desires, gains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the highest state.
Shastra does not mean the rites and formulae laid down in the so-called
dharmashastra, but the path of self-restraint laid down by the seers and the
saints.
67


24. Therefore let shastra be thy authority for determining what ought to be
done and what ought not to be done; ascertain thou the rule of the shastra and
do thy task here (accordingly).
Shastra here too has the same meaning as in the preceding shloka. Let no one
be a law unto himself, but take as his authority the law laid down by men
who have known and lived religion.
Thus ends the sixteenth discourse, entitled ‘Daivasurasampadvibhaga Yoga' in
the converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the
knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 17
1. What, then, O Krishna, is the position of those who forsake the rule of Shastra
and yet worship with faith? Do they act from sattva or rajas or tamas?
The Lord Said:
2. Threefold is the faith of men, an expression of their nature in each case; it is
sattvika, rajas or tamasa. Hear thou of it.
3. The faith of every man is in accord with his innate character; man is made up
of faith; whatever his object of faith, even so is he.
4. Sattvika persons worship the gods; rajas ones, the Yakshas and Rakshasas;
and others—men of tamas—worship manes and spirits.
5. Those men who, wedded to pretentiousness and arrogance, possessed by the
violence of lust and passion, practice fierce austerity not ordained by shastra;

68


6. They, whilst they torture the several elements that make up their bodies,
torture Me too dwelling in them; know them to be of unholy resolves.
7. Of three kinds again is the food that is dear to each; so also are sacrifice,
austerity, and charity. Hear how they differ.
8. Victuals that add to one's years, vitality, strength, health, happiness and
appetite; are savoury, rich, substantial and inviting, are dear to the sattvika.
9. Victuals that are bitter, sour, salty, over-hot, spicy, dry, burning, and causing
pain, bitterness and disease, are dear to rajasa.
10. Food which has become cold, insipid, putrid, stale, discarded and unfit for
sacrifice, is dear to the tamasa.
11. That sacrifice is sattvika which is willingly offered as a duty without desire
for fruit and according to the rule.
12. But when sacrifice is offered with an eye to fruit and for vain glory, know, O
Bharatashreshtha, that it is rajasa.
13. Sacrifice which is contrary to the rule, which produces no food, which lacks
the sacred text, which involves no giving up, which is devoid of faith is said to
be tamasa.
14. Homage to the gods, to Brahmanas, to gurus and to wise men; cleanliness,
uprightness, brahmacharya and non-violence—these constitute austerity (tapas)
of the body.
15. Words that cause no hurt, that are true loving and helpful, and spiritual
study constitute austerity of speech.
16. Serenity, benignity, silence, self-restraint, and purity of the spirit—these
constitute austerity of the mind.
17. This threefold austerity practiced in perfect faith by men not desirous of
fruit, and disciplined, is said to be sattvika.
18. Austerity which is practiced with an eye to gain praise, honour and homage
and for ostentation is said to be rajasa; it is fleeting and unstable.
19. Austerity which is practiced from any foolish obsession, either to torture
oneself or to procure another's ruin, is called tamasa.
20. Charity, given as a matter of duty, without expectation of any return, at the
right place and time, and to the right person is said to be sattvika.
69


21. Charity, which is given either in hope of receiving in return, or with a view
of winning merit, or grudgingly, is declared to be rajasa.
22. Charity given at the wrong place and time, and to the undeserving recipient
disrespectfully and with contempt is declared to be tamasa.
23. AUM TAT SAT has been declared to be the threefold name of Brahman and
by that name were created of old the Brahmanas, the Vedas and sacrifices.
24. Therefore, with AUM ever on their lips, are all the rites of sacrifice, charity
and austerity, performed always to the rule, by Brahmavadins.
25. With the utterance of TAT and without the desire for fruit are the several
rites of sacrifice, austerity and charity performed by those seeking Freedom.
26. SAT is employed in the sense of ‘real' and ‘good'; O Partha, SAT is also
applied to beautiful deeds.
27. Constancy in sacrifice, austerity and charity, is called SAT; and all work for
those purposes is also SAT.
The substance of the last four shlokas is that every action should be done in a
spirit of complete dedication to God. For AUM alone is the only Reality. That
only which is dedicated to It counts.
28. Whatever is done, O Partha, by way of sacrifice, charity or austerity or any
other work, is called Asat if done without faith. It counts for naught hereafter as
here.
Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, entitled ‘Sharaddhatrayavibhaga Yoga' in
the converse of Lord Krishna and Arjuna, on the science of Yoga, as part of the
knowledge of Brahman in the Upanishad called the Bhagawadgita.
DISCOURSE 18
1. Mahabahu! I would fain learn severally the secret of sannyasa and of tyaga, O
Hrishikesha, O Keshinishudana.
70


The Lord Said:
2. Renunciation of actions springing from selfish desire is known as sannyasa
by the seers; abandonment of the fruit of all action is called tyaga by the wise.
3. Some thoughtful persons say: ‘All action should be abandoned as an evil';
others say: ‘Action for sacrifice, charity and austerity should not be
relinquished'.
4. Hear my decision in this matter of tyaga, O Bharatasattama; for tyaga, too, O
mightiest of men, has been described to be of three kinds.
5. Action for sacrifice, charity and austerity may not be abandoned; it must
needs be performed. Sacrifice, charity and austerity are purifiers of the wise.
6. But even these actions should be performed abandoning all attachment and
fruit; such, O Partha, is my best and considered opinion.
7. It is not right to renounce one's allotted task; its abandonment, from delusion,
is said to be tamasa.
8. He who abandons action, deeming it painful and for fear of straining his
limbs, he will never gain the fruit of abandonment, for his abandonment is
rajasa.
9. But when an allotted task is performed from a sense of duty and with
abandonment of attachment and fruit, O Arjuna, that abandonment is deemed
to be sattvika.
10. Neither does he disdain unpleasant action, nor does he cling to pleasant
action—this wise man full of sattva, who practices abandonment, and who has
shaken off all doubts.
11. For the embodied one cannot completely abandon action; but he who
abandons the fruit of action is named a tyagi.
12. To those who do not practice abandonment accrues, when they pass away,
the fruit of action which is of three kinds: disagreeable, agreeable, mixed; but
never to the sannyasins.
13. Learn, from me, O Mahabahu, the five factors mentioned in the Sankhyan
doctrine for the accomplishment of all action:
14. The field, the doer, the various means, the several different operations, the
fifth and the last, the Unseen.
71


15. Whatever action, right or wrong, a man undertakes to do with the body,
speech or mind, these are the five factors thereof.
16. This being so, he who, by reason of unenlightened intellect, sees the
unconditioned Atman as the agent—such a man is dense and unseeing.
17. He who is free from all sense of ‘I', whose motive is untainted, slays not nor
is bound, even though he slay all these worlds.
This shloka though seemingly somewhat baffling is not really so. The Gita
on many occasions presents the ideal to attain which the aspirant has to strive
but which may not be possible completely to realize in the world. It is like
definitions in geometry. A perfect straight line does not exist, but it is
necessary to imagine it in order to prove the various propositions. Even so, it
is necessary to hold up ideals of this nature as standards for imitation in
matters of conduct. This then would seem to be the meaning of this shloka:
He who has made ashes of ‘self', whose motive is untainted, may slay the
whole world, if he will. But in reality he who has annihilated ‘self' has
annihilated his flesh too, and he whose motive is untainted sees the past,
present and future. Such a being can be one and only one—God. He acts and
yet is no doer, slays and yet is no slayer. For mortal man and royal road—the
conduct of the worthy—is ever before him, viz. ahimsa—holding all life
sacred.
18. Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower compose the threefold
urge to action; the means, the action and the doer compose the threefold sum of
action.
19. Knowledge, action, and the doer are of three kinds according to their
different gunas; hear thou these, just as they have been described in the science
of the gunas.
20. Know that knowledge whereby one sees in all beings immutable entity—a
unity in diversity—to be sattvika.
21. That knowledge which perceives separately in all beings several entities of
diverse kinds, know thou to be rajasa.
22. And knowledge which, without reason, clings to one single thing, as though
it were everything, which misses the true essence and is superficial is tamasa.
23. That action is called sattvika which, being one's allotted task, is performed
without attachment, without like or dislike, and without a desire for fruit.
24. That action which is prompted by the desire for fruit, or by the thought of
‘I', and which involves much dissipation of energy is called rajasa.
72


25. That action which is blindly undertaken without any regard to capacity and
consequences, involving loss and hurt, is called tamasa.
26. That doer is called sattvika who has shed all attachment, all thought of ‘I',
who is filled with firmness and zeal, and who recks neither success nor failure.
27. That doer is said to be rajasa who is passionate, desirous of the fruit of
action, greedy, violent, unclean, and moved by joy and sorrow.
28. That doer is called tamasa who is undisciplined, vulgar, stubborn, knavish,
spiteful, indolent, woebegone, and dilatory.
29. Hear now, O Dhananjaya, detailed fully and severally, the threefold division
of understanding and will, according to their gunas.
30. That understanding, O Partha, is sattvika which knows action from inaction,
what ought to be done from what ought not to be done, fear from fearlessness
and bondage from release.
31. That understanding, O Partha, is rajasa, which decides erroneously between
right and wrong, between what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done.
32. That understanding, O Partha, is tamasa, which, shrouded in darkness,
thinks wrong to be right and mistakes everything for its reverse.
33. That will, O Partha, is sattvika which maintains an unbroken harmony
between the activities of the mind, the vital energies and the senses.
34. That will, O Partha, is rajasa which clings, with attachment, to
righteousness, desire and wealth, desirous of fruit in each case.
35. That will, O Partha, is tamasa, whereby insensate man does not abandon
sleep, fear, grief, despair and self-conceit.
36. Hear now from Me, O Bharatarshabha, the three kinds of pleasure.
Pleasure which is enjoyed only by repeated practice, and which puts an end to
pain,
37. Which, in its inception, is as poison, but in the end as nectar, born of the
serene realization of the true nature of Atman—that pleasure is said to be
sattvika.
38. That pleasure is called rajasa which, arising from the contact of the senses
with their objects, is at first as nectar but in the end like poison.
73


39. That pleasure is called tamasa which arising from sleep and sloth and
heedlessness, stupefies the soul both at first and in the end.
40. There is no being, either on earth or in heaven among the gods, that can be
free from these three gunas born of prakriti.
41. The duties of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and Shudras, are distributed
according to their innate qualifications, O Parantapa.
42. Serenity, self-restraint, austerity, purity, forgiveness, uprightness,
knowledge and discriminative knowledge, faith in God are the Brahmana's
natural duties.
43. Valour, spiritedness, constancy, resourcefulness, not fleeing from battle,
generosity, and the capacity to rule are the natural duties of a Kshatriya.
44. Tilling the soil, protection of the cow and commerce are the natural
functions of a Vaishya, while service is the natural duty of a Shudra.
45. Each man, by complete absorption in the performance of his duty, wins
perfection. Hear now how he wins such perfection by devotion to that duty.
46. By offering the worship of his duty to Him who is the moving spirit of all
beings, and by whom all this is pervaded, man wins perfection.
47. Better one's own duty, though uninviting, than another's which may be
more easily performed; doing duty which accords with one's nature, one incurs
no sin.
The central teaching of the Gita is detachment—abandonment of the fruit of
action. And there would be no room for this abandonment if one were to
prefer another's duty to one's own. Therefore one's own duty is said to be
better than another's. It is the spirit in which duty is done that matters, and its
unattached performance is its own reward.
48. One should not abandon, O Kaunteya, that duty to which one is born,
imperfect though it be; for all action, in its inception, is enveloped in
imperfection, as fire in smoke.
49. He who has weaned himself of all kinds, who is master of himself, who is
dead to desire, attains through renunciation the perfection of freedom from
action.
50. Learn now from Me, in brief, O Kaunteya, how he who has gained this
perfection, attains to Brahman, the supreme consummation of knowledge.

74


51. Equipped with purified understanding, restraining the self with firm will,
abandoning sound and other objects of the senses, putting aside likes and
dislikes,
52. Living in solitude, spare in diet, restrained in speech, body and mind, ever
absorbed in dhyanayoga, anchored in dispassion,
53. Without pride, violence, arrogance, lust, wrath, possession, having shed all
sense of ‘mine' and at peace with himself, he is fit to become one with Brahman.
54. One with Brahman and at peace with himself, he grieves not, nor desires;
holding all beings alike, he achieves supreme devotion to Me.
55. By devotion, he realizes in truth how great I am, who I am; and having
known Me in reality he enters into Me.
56. Even whilst always performing actions, he who makes Me his refuge wins,
by My grace, the eternal and imperishable haven.
57. Casting, with thy mind, all actions on Me, make Me thy goal, and resorting
to the yoga of even-mindedness fix thy thought ever on Me.
58. Fixing his thy thought on Me, thou shalt surmount all obstacles by My
grace; but if possessed by the sense of ‘I' thou listen not, thou shalt perish.
59. If obsessed by the sense of ‘I', thou thinkest, ‘I will not fight', vain is thy
obsession; (thy) nature will compel thee.
60. What thou wilt not do, O Kaunteya, because of thy delusion, thou shalt do,
even against thy will, bound as thou art by the duty to which thou art born.
61. God, O Arjuna, dwells in the heart of every being and by His delusive
mystery whirls them all, (as though) set on a machine.
62. In Him alone seek thy refuge with all thy heart, O Bharata. By His grace
shalt thou win to the eternal haven of supreme peace.
63. Thus have I expounded to thee the most mysterious of all knowledge;
ponder over it fully, then act as thou wilt.
64. Hear again My supreme word, the most mysterious of all; dearly beloved
thou art of Me, hence I desire to declare thy welfare.
65. On Me fix thy mind, to Me bring thy devotion, to Me offer thy sacrifice, to
Me make thy obeisance; to Me indeed shalt thou come—solemn is My promise
to thee, thou art dear to Me.
75


66. Abandon all duties and come to Me the only refuge. I will release thee from
all sins; grieve not!
67. Utter this never to him who knows no austerity, has no devotion, nor any
desire to listen, nor yet to him who scoffs at Me.
68. He who will propound this supreme mystery to My devotees, shall, by that
act of highest devotion to Me, surely come to Me.
69. Nor among men is there any who renders dearer service to Me than he; nor
shall there be on earth any more beloved by Me than he.
It is only he who has himself gained the knowledge and lived it in his life
that can declare it to others. These two shlokas cannot possibly have any
reference to him, who no matter how he conducts himself, can give flawless
reading and interpretation of the Gita.
70. And the man of faith who, scorning not, will but listen to it,—even he shall
be released and will go to the happy worlds of men of virtuous deeds.
72. Hast thou heard this, O Partha, with a concentrated mind? Has thy delusion,
born of ignorance, been destroyed, O Dhananjaya?
Arjuna Said:
73. Thanks to Thy grace, O Achyuta, my delusion is destroyed, my
understanding has returned. I stand secure, my doubts all dispelled; I will do
thy bidding.
Sanjaya Said:
74. Thus did I hear this marvellous and thrilling discourse between Vasudeva
and the great-souled Partha.
75. It was by Vyasa's favor that I listened to this supreme and mysterious Yoga
as expounded by the lips of the Master of Yoga, Krishna Himself.
76. O King, as often as I recall that marvellous and purifying discourse between
Keshava and Arjuna, I am filled with recurring rapture.
77. And as often as I recall that marvellous form of Hari, my wonder knows no
bounds and I rejoice again and again.
78. Wheresoever Krishna, the Master of Yoga, is, and wheresoever is Partha the
Bowman, there rest assured are Fortune, Victory, Prosperity, and Eternal Right.

77



